T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (Sonbahar Dönemi) 17 EYLÜL 2017 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S Ö 2017-YDS Fall/English This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. Children and adolescents with attention deficit or expression to fill the space. Mhyperactivity disorder frequently experience difficulties in school settings, most ---- in the areas of academic achievement and interpersonal 1. Some ethnic minority groups of students within the relationships. US, such as African Americans and Hispanic A)appropriately B)urgently Americans, achieve below the national average of all students; however, one ---- is the high educational C)subtly D)compulsorily achievements demonstrated by Asian American students. E)notably A)aspiration B)defect C)exception D)influence E)complaiYnt 5. Children who grow up in two-parent homes where the parents are non-traditional in their own gender roles ---- less gender-stereotypic behaviour than do 2. Without artificial fertilisers and pesticides, there children whose parents are traditional in their role would not be enough food grown on Earth to satisfy Senactment. our needs, even with equal ---- of agricultural output. A)display B)alter C)achieve A)recognition B)deterioration D)reject E)eradicate C)distribution D)fluctuation E)reduction Ö 6. When Columbus sailed west from Spain in 1492 in pursuit of the riches of the Far East, he ---- recent advances in navigation and age-old geographical 3. An important reason to re-evaluate how we are knowledge. raising the next generation grows out of an incredibly exciting discovery about brain A)kept off B)drew on development: during adolescence, the brain’s potential to change through experience is ----. C)put forward D)gave away A)tremendous B)frustrating E)brought about C)debatable D)redundant E)exhausted 1 2017-YDS Fall/English 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. Tomatoes are so widely consumed that they word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). represent a vehicle ---- beneficial nutrients to those who ---- expensive seasonal berries. A) having introduced / would not afford 7. In 1517, the Italian physician Girolamo Fracastoro was probably the first person ---- that fossils are B) introducing / could not afford animal remains; however, it was not until the M 18th century that scientists ---- to realise that fossils C)to have introduced / may not afford can tell us a great deal about the history of living things. D)to introduce / cannot afford A) suggesting / had begun E) being introduced / might not afford B) being suggested / were beginning C)to have suggested / have begun D)to suggest / began Y E) having suggested / were going to begin 10. Early mastery of fire offered many benefits to humankind, including protection ---- wild animals, heat that enabled them to spread ---- cooler regions, and the ability to cook food. A)against / into B)from / by C)to / over D)for / along 8. The technological advancements that once made S nations prosperous, such as the internal E)on / towards combustion engine, ---- to shatter empires during the First World War, on a scale few people ---- before the outbreak of the war. A) had been used / should have imagined B) should have been used / used to imagine Ö 11. Anschluss, the political union of Germany and C)would have been used / might have imagined Austria, was specifically prohibited ---- the Versailles Treaty, but was carried out by Hitler in March 1938 D)were used / could have imagined ---- any resistance from the victors of the First World War. E) must have been used / can imagine A)across / through B)under / without C)for / on D)from / behind E)to / about 2 2017-YDS Fall/English 12. Home-grown produce tastes better than grocery 16. 19th-century scientists fell into a bitter debate as to store produce ---- it is freshly picked and perfectly ---- intelligence lay in anatomy ---- a vital force was ripe, which shines through even when cooked or responsible for thoughts. preserved. A)as / as B)neither / nor A)although B)whereas C)whether C)so / that D)whether / or D)because E)unless M E)not only / but also 13. ---- there have been dozens of proposals for gender-neutral third-person pronouns in English over the past two centuries, none has gained acceptance. Y A)Now that B)As long as C)In case D)Once E)Even though S 14. The story of the cat’s domestication is one of mutual appreciation: early farming communities benefited from cats’ rodent-catching skills ---- cats won themselves protection and shelter without losing their independence. Ö A)even if B)only when C)as soon as D)while E)before 15. In most cultures around the world, men and women typically differ in a number of ways ---- physical appearance, personality traits, and occupational preferences. A)in case of B)in spite of C)such as D)similar to E)as well as 3 2017-YDS Fall/English 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19. passage. A)to be paid B)having paid In the 1960s, people had greater employment C)to have paid D)to pay opportunities and a new buying power. (17)----this growing affluence, music and fashion became E)being paid mass-market industries and were quick to cater to the M demands of the youth market. The growing popularity of A B D E television helped to spread popular culture throughout the world, (18)---- new trends could develop rapidly. Programmes such as Top of the Pops in the UK and TheEd Sullivan Show in the US could lead people (19)---- considerable attention to pop music. In 1962, the Beatles emerged from Liverpool's Cavern Club. Their first album Please Please Me became very famous(20)---- the globe within a year. They grew 20. (21)---- popular, sparking such intense devotion in their fans that it became known as 'Beatlemania'. A)from B)around C)toward Y D)into E)about 17. A)Instead of B)Rather than S C)As a result of D)Contrary to E)Regardless of 21. A)slightly B)coincidentally C)steadily D)equally E)immensely Ö 18. A)though B)otherwise C)instead D)just as E)so 4 2017-YDS Fall/English 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A) would have complained Since ancient times, architecture has been considered B) may complain the ‘mother’ of the arts. (22)---- music, painting, and sculpture that exist in a way separate from life, architecture incorporates life. People and their activities MC)should complain are an (23)---- component of architecture, not merely as spectators to be entertained but as contributors and participants. Painters, sculptors, and composers of D)must have complained music (24)---- about how their viewers or audience never see or hear their art in quite the same way as it was conceived, or that is interpreted or displayed in ways E) used to complain that affect its innate character. However, they have control (25)---- the essence of their work and that essence is, in a way, tightly sealed within the object: the musical score, the covers of a book or the picture frame. (26)----, even the essence of architecture is realised by the people whose activities it influences. Y 25. 22. A)about B)over C)against A)As well as B)By means of SD)from E)with C)As opposed to D)In terms of E)Because of Ö 26. A)Otherwise B)Unfortunately 23. C)For instance D)Therefore A)impoverished B)immeasurable E)On the contrary C)unreasonable D)indispensable E)unintentional 5 2017-YDS Fall/English 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. While scientists are pretty certain that black holes option to complete the given sentence. exist, ----. A) they have never observed one directly, let alone gotten in near proximity of one 27. ---- until they are considered ready to switch to English. B) they are defined as areas in space from which nothing A) Around 2.6 million school-aged children throughout the M can escape US do not speak English at all C)it has been long known that the gravity there is B) It is difficult for bilingual teachers to help their students intensely strong improve their native language skills in some subjects D)they can be produced in supernova explosions, C)In transitional bilingual education, students are taught marking the death of a star academic subjects in their native languages E) they use quantum rules to show that black holes must D)The language rights of ethnic minorities in the US evaporate have been a source of public controversy for decades E) Most people who are opposed to bilinguaYlism are part of the English-only movement 30. Even though parchment was more difficult to produce and more expensive than papyrus, ----. A) the king of Egypt stopped exporting papyrus to Pergamum, fearing that Pergamum's great library 28. Though China began as a small empire centred on Smight overshadow that of Alexandria the Great Bend of the Yellow River, ----. A) almost all of what we know about its culture comes B) the finest parchments, especially those made from the from the wealthy classes skins of very young animals, were called 'vellum' B) the emperor of China, believed to have descended C)parchment was made from the skins of sheep and from the gods, was at the top of society goats while papyrus was made from the stems of the papyrus plant C)it was with the Shang dynasty that people began to D)it was Europe's favoured writing material until the keep written records of Chinese history Ö 14th-century advances in paper making D)kings of local areas gained more power and E) among the most famous medieval manuscripts written sometimes fought among themselves on parchment is the stunning Très Riches Heures of the Duc de Berry E) it expanded considerably over time to become quite a vast kingdom 6 2017-YDS Fall/English 31. Although the science of geology as we know it today 33. ----, we regularly leave digital traces of our economic is a relatively young field, ----. standing when expressing ourselves through posts on social media. A) it basically refers to the scientific study of rocks and soil A) In order that people can stay away from the negative effects of the Internet B) it is a vast field, stretching from palaeontology to mineralogy MB) Unless we talk about business, politics and non-profit work with others C)insightful observations of the Earth's processes dates back to the ancient Greeks C)No matter we reveal our own personal information online D)many geologists think there are some truths that work most of the time D)Although money is a topic that most of us avoid discussing publicly E) many of the processes attached to geology cannot be used for measurement in all situations E) Since more than half of the Internet users stay away from using social media actively Y 32. Preventing children's academic failure means developing individuals who are able to contribute to 34. Early humans had no explanation for the existence the common good; ----. of a vast array of substances and their transformations, ----. A) yet, some types of academic failure prevention call for an increased emSphasis on arithmetic skills A) so they could only attribute chemical phenomena to the acts of the gods B) nevertheless, causes of academic failure include socioeconomic and cultural issues B) but the first step to modern chemistry was the recognition of the fact that atoms existed C)accordingly, academic failure has recently come to mean a failure to acquire basic literacy skills C)as they were able to observe various materials on Earth and predict their future forms D)on the contrary, a positive family environment is very important in preventing academic failure D)because chemical researchers identified the building Ö blocks of matter in modern times E) thus, the prevention of academic failure should be a primary concern for any society E) for they could interpret chemical changes between substances in a small amount of time 7 2017-YDS Fall/English 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. ----, the illness can present itself at any stage of life. English, and the most accurate English translation A) As cultural pressures foster both unhealthy dieting and of the sentences in Turkish. anorexia B) Even though anorexia is often claimed to overlap with 37. New Zealand, separated from other land masses, clinical depression has unique plant and animal species, which are vulnerable to the impacts of non-native species. M C)While there is certainly a prevalence of anorexia in A) Eşsiz bitki ve hayvan türlerinin bulunduğu Yeni teenagers Zelanda diğer kara parçalarından ayrıdır, dolayısıyla bu türler yabancı türlerin etkilerine karşı D)If a lack of serotonin has a causal effect on the savunmasızdır. existence of anorexia B) Yeni Zelanda’nın diğer kara parçalarından ayrı olması, E) Despite the common belief that anorexia is the result eşsiz bitki ve hayvan türlerini yabancı türlerin etkilerine of an abnormality in the brain karşı savunmasız hâle getirmiştir. C)Yeni Zelanda diğer kara parçalarından ayrılmış olsa da yabancı türlerin etkilerine karşı savunmasız hâlde Ybulunan eşsiz bitki ve hayvan türlerine sahiptir. D)Diğer kara parçalarından ayrı olan Yeni Zelanda, yabancı türlerin etkilerine karşı savunmasız hâlde 36. World Space Week takes place every year in bulunan eşsiz bitki ve hayvan türlerine sahiptir. October, ----. E) Yeni Zelanda diğer kara parçalarından ayrı olduğu için A) so World Space Week 2016 has been, by far, the burada bulunan eşsiz bitki ve hayvan türleri, yabancı largest space celebration in history türlerin etkilerine karşı savunmasızdır. B) because you do not have to be an astronaut to be part S of the global celebration of World Space Week C)and it has grown into the largest public space event on Earth since its declaration by the United Nations 38. Believing that sports could be used to promote peace between countries, the French aristocrat D)but it can be a great framework for countries and Pierre de Coubertin organised the first modern agencies to foster space exploration Olympic Games in Athens, in 1896. E) while the Mexican Space Agency has been an A) Fransız aristokrat Pierre de Coubertin, sporun ülkeler Öimportant promoter of World Space Week arasındaki barışa önayak olması için kullanılabileceğine inanarak 1896'da Atina'da ilk modern Olimpiyat Oyunları'nı düzenledi. B) 1896'da, sporun ülkeler arasındaki barışa önayak olması için kullanılabileceği inancıyla ilk modern Olimpiyat Oyunları'nı düzenleyen kişi Fransız aristokrat Pierre de Coubertin'dir. C)Fransız aristokrat Pierre de Coubertin, spor aracılığıyla ülkeler arasındaki barışa önayak olunabileceğine inanarak 1896'da Atina'da ilk modern Olimpiyat Oyunları'nı düzenledi. D)Fransız aristokrat Pierre de Coubertin, sporun ülkeler arasındaki barışa önayak olabileceğine inandığı için 1896'da Atina'da ilk modern Olimpiyat Oyunları'nın düzenlenmesini sağladı. E) İlk modern Olimpiyat Oyunları'nın 1896'da düzenlenmesi, Fransız aristokrat Pierre de Coubertin'in sporun ülkeler arasındaki barışa önayak olması için kullanılabileceği düşüncesine dayanır. 8 2017-YDS Fall/English 39. Originally imported from China in the 12th century, 41. Newton'ın evrensel yer çekimi kanunu, Güneş tea has been a significant component of Japanese sistemindeki nesnelerin matematiksel olarak tahmin culture ever since. edilebilir bir dizi kurala göre hareket ettiğini göstermektedir. A) 12. yüzyıldan beri Japon kültürünün önemli bir parçası olan çay, aslında Çin’den getirilmiştir. A) It is shown by Newton's law of universal gravitation that the objects in the solar system move according to B) 12. yüzyılda aslında Çin'den getirilen çay, o zamandan Ma mathematically predictable set of rules. beri Japon kültürünün önemli bir parçası olmuştur. B) Newton’s law of universal gravitation shows that the C)Japon kültürünün önemli bir parçası olan çay, aslında objects in the solar system move according to a 12. yüzyıldan beri Çin'den getirilmektedir. mathematically predictable set of rules. D)Çay aslında 12. yüzyılda Çin'den getirilse de o C)Newton's law of universal gravitation shows how the zamandan beri Japon kültürünün önemli bir parçası objects in the solar system move according to a olmuştur. mathematically predictable set of rules. E) Çay aslında 12. yüzyılda Çin’den getirildiğinden beri D)Thanks to Newton's law of universal gravitation, it is Japon kültürünün önemli bir parçası olmuştur. shown that the objects in the solar system move according to a mathematically predictable set of rules. Y E) Newton's law of universal gravitation shows that the moves of the objects in the solar system are linked to a mathematically predictable set of rules. 40. Kutup ayıları iklim değişikliğinin sadece sembolü değil, aynı zamanda her yaz biraz daha seyrekleşen doğal yaşam alanlarını terk eden asıl kurbanlarıdır. A) Polar bears are both the bol of climate change and true victims of it,S because they have to leave their 42. Besin kaynaklarının dağılımı, bolluğu ve habitat which has become sparser every summer. mevsimselliği, insanların göçebe veya yerleşik bir yaşam sürme tercihini etkilemiştir. B) Climate change is not only responsible for making A) The distribution, abundance and seasonality of food polar bears a bol but also a victim of it, as they resources affected people's choice to live a nomadic have to leave their habitat becoming sparser every or settled existence. summer. B) What affected people's choice to live a nomadic or C)Polar bears are known as both the bol and the settled existence were the distribution, abundance and victims of climate change since they have to leave Ötheir habitat every summer as it becomes sparser. seasonality of food resources. C)People's choice to live a nomadic or settled existence D) Polar bears are not just the bol of climate change was affected by the distribution, abundance and but they are also true victims, leaving their habitat seasonality of food resources. which has become sparser each summer. D)Food resources, with their distribution, abundance and E) Polar bears have become the bol of climate seasonality, affected people's choice to live a nomadic change; however, they are also the victims of it due to or settled existence. the necessity of leaving their habitat every summer. E) People's choice to live a nomadic or settled existence was affected by food resources, based on their distribution, abundance and seasonality. 9 2017-YDS Fall/English 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. What is the main function of NIR spectrometers? A) They enable us to examine the chemical structure of objects. Sometimes it feels like the Internet has the answer to B) They help scientists explore the chemistry of objects everything. At our fingertips, we have the ability to through search engines. improve our knowledge or test someone's doubtful "Did you know...?" statement. Our online searches have their M C)They reply to questions that cannot be answered limits, though. If we have questions about what is in through the Internet. front of us, the Internet cannot always help. Is this water safe to drink? How much fat is really in this steak? D)They reveal the amount of substances like water and Search engines cannot access these objects, so their sugar in foods. answers are limited to averages and tendencies. To get real answers, we must tap into the chemical make-up of E) They detect whether objects are destroyed by X-rays our world. The technology to do this exists, but it is or ultraviolet radiation. limited to immovable pieces of lab kit called near-infrared (NIR) spectrometers. NIR spectrometers work by shining a spectrum of near-infrared light onto objects and analysing the light that bounces back. Say you want to scan an apple. Each substanceY within the fruit, be it water, sugar, or fibre, will respond to the light 45. What is the drawback of NIR spectrometers? in a unique way. The bonds within them will be energised, moving around at specific wavelengths. The A) The light they give out can be hazardous. spectrometer can detect these wavelengths and then identify what is inside your particular apple. NIR B) When the substances in an object respond in the light is also perfectly safe to use, unlike more same way, they cannot be distinguished. destructive X-rays or ultraviolet radiation. C)Their functions are limited to foods. S D)They are restricted to laboratory use. 43. By asking questions such as "Is this water safe to E) They cannot accurately analyse the light reflected from drink?", what is the author actually trying to say? objects. A) We can expand our knowledge about almost everything by using the Internet. B) A great number of questions can be answered thanks Öto the Internet. 46. Which could be the best title for this passage? C)What we can learn through online searches is not A) Advantages and Limitations of Search Engines endless. B) Are NIR Spectrometers Safe to Use? D)Doubtful statements made by others cannot be exactly clarified by doing online searches. C)Can Wavelengths Be Used with Search Engines? E) We can easily discover averages and tendencies via search engines. D)Choosing the Best Food to Eat through Scanning E) Seeing Inside Things through NIR Spectrometers 10 2017-YDS Fall/English 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. One can conclude from the passage that the problems of volunteer recruitment ----. A) have been solved using a strategy called 2014 was a landmark year for drug development. The 'over-recruitment' US Food and Drug Administration approved 41 new pharmaceuticals, the most since 1996. Each of these B) show many differences in each clinical trial will hopefully make the world a better place, alleviating M distress and preventing premature deaths. But C)are to be solved soon by making up for waste of time developing drugs is incredibly expensive – and in clinical trials increasingly so. The cost of bringing a new compound to the market is now around $2.5 billion, twice as much in D)can be reduced by providing people with more real terms as it was a decade ago. One of the costliest guidance on volunteering parts is recruiting and retaining volunteers to test the drug in a clinical trial. Around three quarters of trials are E) have changed a lot in time with respect to their basic delayed by problems with this process. Most trials characteristics over-recruit by up to 50 percent to compensate, but the drop-out is still so high that only 1 in 20 volunteers end up generating useful data. The result: wasted time, effort and money. That is not for lack of patiYent willingness. In 2013, the UK's House of Commons found that people want to volunteer but do not know how. Yet, 49. What is the primary purpose of the author? volunteers can be brought on board and kept there by A) To highlight the number of the drugs introduced to the making more effort to inform and help them to choose market in 2014 which trial they would like to enter. The problems with volunteer recruitment were identified a decade ago but B) To explain reasons why developing drugs has become have not been eradicated. It is high time they were. It is too expensive in recent years in everyone's interest to get rid of this unnecessary waste. SC)To elaborate on the role that the US Food and Drug Administration plays in developing drugs D)To inform readers about some important problems confronted in clinical trials of drugs 47. It is understood from the passage that many participants in clinical trials ----. E) To emphasise the health benefits that 41 new A) think that their time and effort will be wasted pharmaceuticals are expected to yield ÖB) are recruited again when a clinical trial ultimately fails C)have to comply with strict regulations in order to take part in these trials 50. Which could be the best title for this passage? D)are well informed about the processes and procedures A) The Activities of the US Food and Drug Administration in these trials B) A Variety of Methods of Volunteer Recruitment in Drug E) fail to contribute to the production of reliable data on Trials drugs C)Time to Take Voluntary Participation in Drug Trials Seriously D)The Huge Expense of Drug Development E) How to Participate in Clinical Trials of Drugs 11 2017-YDS Fall/English 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. What could be said about the philosophical tradition of Socrates? A) His ideas fiercely competed with those of Alcibiades Socrates was a classical Greek philosopher whose and Critias. thoughts had profound influence in his field. Little is known about his early and middle years, although B) His philosophical arguments were heartily welcomed according to ancient tradition, he worked as a M by authorities. stonecutter. The fact that he served as a heavily armed soldier in the Peloponnesian War indicates that during C)His main philosophical point of view was to debate the the early years of the war, he was roughly middle class, legitimacy of the Athenian democracy. because men from this social class were required to provide their own armour. At some time during this D)Authorities thought that his prevailing philosophy was period, Socrates began the mission of moral reform for in line with religious principles. which he became famous. He passed his time arguing E) He discussed ethical issues with the Athenians to about various moral subjects that interested him with his foster respectable behaviours. fellow Athenians and attempting to inspire them to be virtuous and honourable. Socrates' followers included not only Plato, but Alcibiades and Critias as well, both of whom later undermined the Athenian demoYcracy. Possibly because of such notorious connections, Socrates was accused of impiety – showing a lack of respect for God – and corrupting youth. Different 53. Which of the following can be inferred based on the versions of the speech he made to defend himself speech Socrates made to defend his actions? against these accusations still exist today. In his A) His defence might have had an adverse effect on his speech, he described himself as a great benefactor to chances of survival. the city, and claimed that the Athenians would harm themselves in killing him. In spite of, or perhaps to some B) His defence failed just because he had some ill-famed extent because of, Shis defence, Socrates was convicted, supporters who were strongly condemned by the sentenced to death, and executed. Athenians. C)Although he completely refuted accusations in his defence, he was executed. 51. Which of the following is certainly true about D)He made several spontaneous speeches to defend Socrates? himself in the court. A) His initiation of moral reform earned him a reputation E) He failed to take appropriate action to reject the Öin Athenian society. accusations against him. B) Socrates earned his living by selling his ideas to his fellow philosophers. C)Socrates became a soldier because he wanted to gain a higher social status. 54. Which could be the best title for this passage? D)Socrates took up stonecutting in his early years and A) Achievements of the Distinguished Ancient practised it until his execution. Philosopher Socrates E) One can learn minute details of his whole life because B) The Execution of the Leading Greek Philosopher he is a famous philosopher. Socrates C)Unfounded Accusations Against Socrates D)A Life Story of Socrates: From Ideas to Execution E) A Soldier Serving as a Philosopher: Socrates 12 2017-YDS Fall/English 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. It is clearly understood from the passage that young people ----. A) may encounter a lack of self-esteem if they face Body image can be affected by outside influences. criticism from their parents Media sources, such as television, the Internet, and magazines, often portray people closer to the commonly B) can disregard the influence of parental behaviour on accepted ideal body type than the average body image M their perception of body image in order to sell their products and services. Consequently, people, especially older children and C)could get help from their families or peers to improve young adults, are overly influenced by such depictions their perception of body image of body image. Family life can also affect children's perception of their body image. Parents who criticise D)tend to follow the latest trends to become much more how their children look, talk, or act, may often have a popular among their peers negative effect on the development of self-esteem in E) are often forced by their peers to follow popular trends, their children. Young people may also be affected by the which either improves or harms their perception of comments of classmates and peers when it comes to body image their body image. Teasing is often a method used by young people to convey negative comments and hurtful words. Common characteristics for being teYased include being too small or too large; too smart or too dumb; too popular or not very popular; and any of a number of other personal characterisations. Additionally, 57. According to the author, teasing ----. young people often try to pressure their peers to conform to what is currently popular in clothing styles, A) might sometimes be performed by media sources to language, and other characteristics – all that can draw attention to the importance of body image potentially hurt one's perception of their body image. B) is generally used by people who are not satisfied with their own body image S C)is used as a way to communicate both positive and 55. What could be inferred about the relationship negative comments between the media and body image? D)is mostly characterised with criticism on wearing A) The body image promoted by the media encourages outmoded clothes people to keep up with the latest trends, thus enriching their lives. E) might concern a great variety of issues related with typical personal features B) The way the media presents body image can badly Ö influence how people see their bodies. C)The media presents an ideal body type in order to improve people's perceptions of their body image. 58. What is the main idea of the passage? D)A great majority of people are aware of how the media affects their perception of body image. A) Families can improve their children's body image by criticising them and choosing what is good for them. E) The ideal body type described by the media is harshly criticised by families since it has a negative impact on B) It is no use ignoring peer pressure if you want to build their children's self-esteem. a positive perception of body image. C)Popular ways of behaving and types of clothing may help young people build a stronger body image. D)Various familial and societal factors can influence the perception of body image in young people. E) Families and society should stop trying to shape young people's body image through criticism and teasing. 13 2017-YDS Fall/English 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. Which of the following is true about De Materia Medica? A) It contained information on which plants are more Botany, the study of plants, is one of the major fields of widely used to make medicines. biology, together with zoology and microbiology, and has been around for a very long time. Aristotle and B) It continued to be highly influential even after the Theophrastus, who lived in ancient Greece around the M invention of the compound microscope. 4th century BC, were both involved in identifying and C)It contributed much to the invention of the compound describing plants. Theophrastus has been called the microscope. 'father of botany' due to his two well-known books on plants that are still influential. The early study of plants, D)It was written by Dioscorides as a reaction to the however, was not limited to Western cultures. The botanical developments that occurred in China. Chinese developed the study of botany along lines similar to the ancient Greeks at about the same time. E) It was a book for consultation in the Western world for In 60 AD, another Greek, Dioscorides, wrote De Materia a very long time. Medica, a work that described a thousand medicines, 60 percent of which came from plants. It remained the guidebook on medicines in the Western world for 1,500 Y years until the compound microscope was invented in the late 16th century. During the 17th century, progress was made in plant experimentation. In the 19th century, 61. What is the current objective of botany? rapid advances were made in the study of plant A) To study the works of Theophrastus and Dioscorides diseases after the potato blight that killed potato crops for better crops and new medicines in Ireland in the 1840s. The study of plants continues today as botanists try to understand the structure, B) To improve products in the agricultural and behaviour, and cellular activities of plants in order to pharmaceutical sectors develop better crops and create new medicines. S C)To make people have a better understanding of the long history of the discipline D)To prevent certain plants like the potato plant from 59. Why is Theophrastus called the ‘father of botany’? catching diseases A) He distinguished botany from zoology and microbiology as a distinct field. E) To analyse plants in greater detail by enhancing the experiments conducted in the 17th century B) He was more successful than Aristotle in identifying Öand describing plants. C)He was the first person who studied plants. D)He produced significant works whose effects 62. What is the passage mainly about? last today. A) The comparison of the Western and Chinese studies of botany E) He worked on plants for long periods of time. B) The differences between botany and other fields of biology C)The contribution of botany to the cultivation of crops D)The history of the study of botany E) The medical applications of botany 14 2017-YDS Fall/English 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Patient: option to complete the dialogue.  I don’t know if I’ll ever overcome this fear. Can you tell me again about this new memory therapy you want to try? 63. Journalist:  Could you tell us about your research on heroic Psychologist: Egyptian kings?  Well,I’m going to show you a series of pictures of M the thing you’re afraid of at 10-minute intervals. Anthropologist:  We found a skeleton that showed extensive battle Patient: trauma. After examining his injuries, we  ---- discovered that he had died due to the injuries he got while on a horse. Psychologist:  Time is crucial to disrupting the brain’s ability to Journalist: remember your fear. If we increase the time  ---- intervals between the pictures, your brain has more time to remember, and that’s exactly what Anthropologist: we don’t want.  Previously, the Egyptian kings riding iYnto battle A) Are the lengths of the intervals important? could only be seen in paintings and were thought to be just aggressive depictions of the ruling B) Is there a particular order of pictures? class. This is the first real evidence that points to the kings actually joining their armies in battle. C)How many times will you show me these pictures? A) How does this discovery impact our traditional perceptions of the Egyptian kings? D)What does memory have to do with my fear? B) How often did the Egyptian kings fight in battle and get E) What happens if my fear doesn’t go away? injured? S C)Why is it significant that all the Egyptian kings were on horseback in battle? D)Why did you focus on the injuries the Egyptian kings had? E) Do you think that old paintings portray the Egyptian Ökings in detail? 15 2017-YDS Fall/English 65. Ann: 66. Journalist:  There's a very interesting article in this magazine  You always highlight the importance of keeping a about a scientist, Ella Al-Shamahi, who’s a checklist during complex operations. You’ve also palaeontologist and also performs stand-up written a book on how to create such checklists. comedy about her field. Why do we need them? Jane: Surgeon: M  Science and comedy, how does that work?  Well, they're memory aids. They can help you perform well when you're working with many Ann: people on a complex procedure which eventually  ---- will save lives during surgery. Jane: Journalist:  I get it now. She's using comedy to increase  ---- interest in her scientific research. Well, she might be on the right path, maybe comedy is the next Surgeon: stage in the evolution of how we present science.  A checklist was used during surgical procedures for 8,000 patients in eight hospitals around the A) I guess she's using palaeontology to add variety to the Yworld. In every hospital, major complications were topics she's talking about in her performance to be different from the other stand-up performers. reduced by 36 percent and the death rate was lowered by half. B) I'm not sure, but I can assume that she might have A) How did you come to the decision that checklists are really good time management skills to be able to do really beneficial? research and fulfill other responsibilities as a palaeontologist. B) How did you manage to create a common checklist to be used in various complications? C)Well, when you think about it, we seem to have a communication problem in science, so she might be SC)How exactly can a checklist be used during a surgical using comedy to get to people with no enthusiasm procedure? about science. D)How could you spare enough time to write a book on D)The rest of the article says it's an incredible therapy for checklists while working as a surgeon? her as some of the places she researches are quite dark and it's nice to find the funny side in them. E) How did you convince your medical staff to start using a checklist? E) If she's really good at it, these shows might even make her famous meaning that she can also continue doing Öresearch in her field if she wants to. 16 2017-YDS Fall/English 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Robert: rephrased form of the given sentence.  Can perfectionism or stress be a reason for nail-biting? Carl: 68. The fierce debate among scientists over whether  This might be true, but I'm not sure one can find intelligence is inherited or acquired later is yet to be reliable research as to why nail-biting is so resolved. M addictive. A) Scientists have not still agreed upon how much of intelligence is inherited and how much of it is acquired Robert: after birth.  ---- B) Whether people are innately endowed with intelligence Carl: or they acquire it at a later time has stimulated an  Anyway, I think it'd be better not to form an intense debate among scientists. opinion on the causes of nail-biting without C)A hot debate among scientists revolves around the knowing all the details and scientific facts. inheritance of intelligence rather than its acquisition in A) Some experts say childhood nail-biters are less prone the following years. to allergies, presumably because they're exposed to Y more germs. D)The heated debate among scientists over whether people are born with intelligence or they acquire it B) The most common treatment of this addiction, which is later has not still ended in agreement. also cheap and widely available, is to apply a bitter-tasting nail polish to the nails. E) The fact that intelligence can be both inherited and acquired in later years has been vigorously debated by C)I know some other body-focused repetitive behaviours scientists. like skin-picking and the urge to pull out hair, and they sometimes coexist with nail-biting. S D)Doctors state that nail-biting does not only lead to harmful effects in fingers, but also mouth and more generally the digestive system. E) We can speculate that it's to do with experiencing high 69. According to a recent study, there are more overfed levels of anxiety and fear, or being too passionate people in the world today than those who do not or impatient about things and events. have enough food to eat. A) A new study shows that there is a significant increase in the number of overfed people worldwide when Ö compared to those who suffer from a lack of food. B) A recent study reveals that, across the world, overfed people now outnumber those who are malnourished. C)A current study suggests that, in today’s world, the difference between the number of people who do not have enough food and that of those who overeat is slight. D)The claim that there are as many overfed people as malnourished people in the world today has been proven by a recent study. E) A new study has found that malnourished people are far greater in number than overfed people in the entire world today. 17 2017-YDS Fall/English 70. It is imperative that women start modifying their risk 71. It is already known that flowers display their bright factors when they are younger in order to reduce the colours and use their beautiful scents to lure bees; risk of developing heart disease once they are older. however, scientists have recently discovered that they use electric fields as well. A) If women immediately begin changing their risk factors when they are still young, they may decrease their risk A) Scientists used to believe that flowers avoided of developing heart disease in their old ages. using electric fields to attract bees despite utilising Mtheir vivid colours and scents, but now they suggest B) Women are recommended to start changing their risk electric fields are also used. factors at young ages rather than old ages, because this will reduce the risk of developing heart disease. B) It is common knowledge that bees are attracted by flowers' bright colours and beautiful scents, but what C)It is extremely important for women to begin changing draws scientists' attention more these days is the their risk factors when they are young because it might electric fields that flowers also use. not be easy to decrease the risk of having heart disease in their old ages. C)It has long been known that flowers use several methods to attract bees, such as displaying striking D)Women should immediately begin changing their risk colours and using their appealing scents, but scientists factors at a young age so that they can decrease the now think that flowers use electric fields for the same risk of having heart disease in their old ages. Ypurpose. E) It is urgent that women begin changing their risk D)In addition to the exploitation of their bright colours factors at a young age, otherwise the risk of and beautiful scents, flowers make use of electric developing heart disease among old women cannot be fields to attract bees, which has long been known by decreased. scientists. E) The fact that flowers manifest their brilliant colours and benefit from their pleasant scents to attract bees has been known for a while, but what scientists have S recently revealed is their use of electric fields. Ö 18 2017-YDS Fall/English 72-75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the 73. St. Valentine's Day is set aside for lovers and for passage. declarations of love, with these declarations traditionally sent anonymously. ---- Theories put forward generally refer the custom back to Roman 72. We are terrified of sharks, largely thanks to their times, telling the story of St. Valentine, a Roman reputation as vicious killers. Shark attacks are rare priest who assisted the Christian martyrs during the but appear to be rising: There were 98 unprovoked persecutions in the time of Claudius II. St. Valentine M attacks worldwide in 2015, six fatal. There are three was caught and ordered to give up the Christian particularly notorious species: tiger sharks, great faith. He refused to do so and was executed on the whites, and oceanic whitetips. ---- Recently, 14th February 270 AD. In another telling, scientists have been shedding new light on these St. Valentine was executed for the cause of love, enigmatic creatures that are seemingly vital to the after allowing Christian soldiers to marry in spite of seas, and not as scary as you might think. a ban on them imposed by Emperor Claudius A) Tiger sharks are unlikely to attack divers who keep Gothicus. them in sight. A) St. Valentine's Day flourishes in cultures where there is a free choice of spouse. B) Novice divers may come face-to-face with the sharks and see their true nature. B) As with many traditions of this kind, it is difficult to Y determine the real origin of the practice. C)On the other hand, a lesser known fact is the crucial role sharks play in ocean ecology. C)In the past, there was a belief that the first member of the opposite sex you met on this day would be your D)Tiger sharks in the protected waters of the Bahamas valentine. are relatively harmless, but they rarely stay in one place for long. D)Nowadays, St. Valentine's Day is promoted for commercial interests, by businesses from card E) Scientists in Australia say that sharks keep fish manufacturers to flower merchants. numbers down aSnd stop them degrading sea grass ecosystems. E) The Valentine's card as we know it today did not begin to gain popularity until recent decades. Ö 19 2017-YDS Fall/English 74. There is some indication that children whose access 75. Beautifully coloured birds, acrobatic monkeys, and to television is restricted are less likely to be noisy insects are just a few of the sights and sounds negatively affected by it, even when they do view it. in a tropical rainforest – the richest plant and animal A study has found that children whose parents habitat in the world. Rainforests are found near the restrict viewing are less likely to be unnecessarily Equator where it is wet and warm enough for plants fearful of the outside world. ---- In other words, to grow all year round. Most rainforest trees are children whose parents severely limit access to evergreen, and they produce food and shelter for a M television may actually become more aggressive, vast number of animals. ---- Every year, huge areas perhaps due to the frustration that results from the are cut down for timber and to make way for deprivation of privileges. pastures and crops. A) It should be noted, however, that there is some A) Yet, the negative effect of global warming on this rich evidence that very extreme levels of restriction will fauna can be seen. backfire. B) Therefore, people should try hard to protect the variety B) Children with limited access to television are less likely of species living in rainforests. to believe that what they see on television is real. C)In other words, the tropical rainforest is home to C)It is possible that the mere presence of parents while various plants and animals. Y viewing makes children feel happy. D)However, despite this richness, rainforests have D)Children who receive parental restriction are better recently been shrinking. able to quickly understand the plots of television programmes. E) Some trees, on the other hand, are used to provide shelter for human beings. E) Much of the research on the effects of television viewing has focused on children whose parents are more sophisticated consumers of television. S Ö 20 2017-YDS Fall/English 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 78. (I) In the North American autumn, Arctic air meets sentence in the passage. warmer air from the south, creating the perfect conditions for storms. (II) Wind rages around all of the Great Lakes at this time of year, but Lake Erie is the 76. (I)Images of distant and unknown places have inspired shallowest and contains the least water. (III) The water explorers and public for a very long time. (II)The of Lake Erie is darkened by mud and sand mixed by the photographs of Yellowstone were the reason why it was strong currents. (IV) This means its waves are typically selected as America's first national park in 1872. Mthe biggest as it is more easily influenced by the (III)Photographer William Henry Jackson captured the wind. (V) As the wind blows, the waves start to build a public's imagination and support by confirming the beat, rhythmically sloshing back and forth along the existence of western landmarks in the park. (IV) Half a lake’s roughly east-west axis, and growing in height as century later photographer Ansel Adams began his long they do. career of delighting the public with his pictures of parks A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V that many people would never visit. (V)These landmarks which were previously regarded as glorified myths made it easier to attract attention. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Y 79. (I) During impression formation, we tend to pay special attention to negative or potentially threatening information.(II)When we come to form an overall impression of the person, that negative information is 77. (I)Groups perform many tasks, of which making weighed more heavily.(III)That is, a negative trait decisions is one of the most important. (II) The course of affects an impression more than a positive trait, our lives is largely determined by decisions made by everything else being equal.(IV) For example, in one groups: for exampleS, selection committees, juries, study, students rated 97 percent of their professors in parliaments and groups of friends.(III)In addition, many college favorably despite all the mixed experiences of us spend a significant portion of our working lives they have had in their college classes. (V)The main making decisions in groups. (IV) Therefore,social explanation for this fact is that negative traits are more psychologists have long been interested in the social unusual and therefore more distinctive. processes involved in group decision-making, and in A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V whether groups make better or different decisions than individuals do.(V) Another important dimension of group decision-making is the ability to recall information. ÖA) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 80. (I) The ptoms of senile dementia generally include a decline in memory, learning, attention, and judgement, as well as disorientation and increased difficulties in communication.(II)Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause of senile dementia, accounting for around 70 percent of all cases. (III)Alzheimer’s disease often makes it more difficult to think of the right word, for example. (IV) Behavioural manifestations of Alzheimer’s disease include a decline in personal hygiene, inappropriate social behaviour, and apparent changes in personality. (V) Wandering and forgetting what one is doing can also become a serious problem, as this can create a genuine danger. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 21 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS. M Y S Ö O 001 2017 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ 2017-YDS SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ 17-09-2017 1. C 48. D 2. C 49. D 3. A 50. C 4. E 51. A M 5. A 52. E 6. B 53. A 7. D 54. D 8. D 55. B 9. D 56. A 10. A 57. E 11. B 58. D 12. D 59. D Y 13. E 60. E 14. D 61. B 15. C 62. D 16. D 63. A 17. C 64. A 18. E 65. C S 19. D 66. A 20. B 67. E 21. E 68. D 22. C 69. B 23. D 70. D 24. B 71. E Ö25. B 72. C 26. E 73. B 27. C 74. A 28. E 75. D 29. A 76. D 30. D 77. E 31. C 78. C 32. E 79. D 33. D 80. C 34. A 35. C 36. C 37. D 38. A 39. B 40. D 41. B 42. A 43. C 44. A 45. D 46. E 47. E T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) (İlkbahar Dönemi) 7 NİSAN 2013 PAZAR İNGİLİZCE Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. AÇIKLAMA 1. Bu soru kitapçığındaki test 80 sorudan oluşmaktadır. 5. Bu sınavın değerlendirilmesi doğru cevap sayısı üzerinden yapılacak, yanlış cevaplar dikkate alın- mayacaktır. 2. Bu test için verilen cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır (2.5 saat). 6. Cevaplamaya istediğiniz sorudan başlayabilirsiniz. Bir 3. Bu kitapçıktaki testte yer alan her sorunun sadece bir soru ile ilgili cevabınızı, cevap kâğıdında o soru için ay- doğru cevabı vardır. Bir soru için birden çok cevap yeri rılmış olan yere işaretlemeyi unutmayınız. işaretlenmişse o soru yanlış cevaplanmış sayılacaktır. 4. İşaretlediğiniz bir cevabı değiştirmek istediğinizde, sil- 7. Sınavda uyulacak diğer kurallar bu kitapçığın arka ka- me işlemini çok iyi yapmanız gerektiğini unutmayınız. pağında belirtilmiştir. İNGİLİZCE Bu testte 80 soru vardır. 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere 4. Many scientists believe that our sanitized uygun düşen sözcük ya da ifadeyi bulunuz. surroundings are ---- allergic disorders in children, which have doubled in the last decade. 1. UNICEF is deeply committed to creating a world in which all children, regardless of their gender or A) extracting B)fulfilling socioeconomic background, have ---- to free, compulsory and quality education. C)unifying D)ensuring A)access B)dedication C)insight E) fostering D)addiction E)tendency 5. In non-literate societies, valuable information about the past is often enshrined in oral tradition – poems, hymns or sayings ---- from generation to generation by word of mouth. A) taken off B)handed down 2. In some countries, such as Brazil and Russia, codes have been put in place to promote ---- logging of C)thrown up D)kept off forest ecosystems. E) rooted out A)applicable B)penetrable C)notable D)sustainable E)provable 6. By mapping equatorial rainfall since 800 AD, scientists have ---- how tropical weather may change over the next century. 3. Before they are allowed to be used, all medicines, A) taken out B)put aside including vaccines, are ---- tested to assess how safe and effective they are. C)brought down D)figured out A) incidentally B)hazardously E) counted upon C)thoroughly D)fatally E) offensively 1 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere 10. China’s rapid growth ---- trade is seen as a plus for uygun düşen sözcük ya da ifadeyi bulunuz. the Southeast Asian nations because it helps to spur development ---- the region. 7. The physics of elementary particles in the 20th century ---- by the observation of particles whose A) of / without B)by / about existence ---- by theorists decades earlier. C)upon / over D)at / under A) has been distinguished / was predicted E) in / across B) distinguished / is being predicted C) was distinguished / had been predicted D) is distinguished / has been predicted E) had been distinguished / was being predicted 11. As Antarctic glaciers collapse ---- the sea, scientists struggle to find out what that means ---- the rise of sea levels. A) against / in B)over / to 8. At the end of the First World War, the leaders of C)around / along D)on / for victorious countries gathered at Versailles, and there, they ---- to decide what penalties Germany, E) from / behind Austria and other allies ----. A) tried / would have to pay B) had tried / must have paid C) were trying / were paying D) used to try / might have paid 12. ---- lead was widely known to be dangerous, by the E) could try / should have paid early years of the20th century, it could be found in all manners of consumer products. A) Since B)Once C)Only when D)Even though E) Given that 9. ---- the types of individuals it seeks to attract, an organization ---- to consider what methods to use to reach them. A) To have established / could need B) Having established / needs C) Establishing / had needed D) Established / needed E) Being established / will need 2 13. Animals trapped in a stone called ‘amber’ are 16. ---- deriving two-thirds of its power supply from sometimes so well preserved that they look ---- they fossil fuels, power producers in India cannot get have just died. enough pipeline space to distribute natural gas. A) so that B)in case A) Despite B)Besides C)as though D)even if C)As a result of D)By means of E) now that E) Rather than 14. The European Commission has put forward that policies to cut greenhouse gases will not work ---- individuals share the vision of a low-carbon society. A) provided that B)after C)but D)while E) unless 15. When modern coastal fish-farming began 30 years ago, no one was doing things right, ---- for the environment ---- the industry’s long-term sustainability. A) whether / or B)such / as C)so / that D)either / or E) as / as 3 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük ya da 19. ifadeyi bulunuz. A)About B)To C)For Cities, large and small, are at the heart of a fast changing global economy – they are a cause of, and a response to world economic growth. Many urban areas D)Upon E)By are growing(17)---- their rural hinterlands are depressed, which forces impoverished rural people to move to the cities in search of work. These newcomers often end up not(18)---- the opportunities they are looking for, so they become part of the urban poor. (19)---- arrival to the city, they often encounter lack of 20. housing and infrastructure services. To(20)---- the lack of available homes, newcomers often set up shelters on A) cut down on B)go in for the city outskirts, usually on public-owned land. They often live without electricity, running water, a sewerage C)turn back on D)fall behind with system, roads and other urban services.(21)---- dealing with poor sanitation and pollution from dirty cooking E) make up for fuels and primitive stoves, they are exposed to modern environmental hazards, such as urban air pollution, exhaust fumes and industrial pollution. 21. A) Despite B)Owing to C)For the sake of D)In addition to E) Unlike 17. A) unless B)in case C)so that D)whenever E) because 18. A) to find B) finding C) to have found D) being found E) to be found 4 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük ya da 24. ifadeyi bulunuz. A) jeopardize B)withdraw No single country owns Antarctica.(22)----, countries wishing to have a say in how the Antarctic (both the C)underestimate D)recognize continent itself and the surrounding Southern Ocean) is governed(23)----, and agree to abide by, the Antarctic E) deteriorate Treaty. However, prior to the signing of the Antarctic Treaty in 1959, several countries had made claims to parts of Antarctica, some of which overlapped. The Treaty does not(24)----these claims; Article IV of the Treaty states in part, “No acts or activities taking place while the present Treaty is in force shall constitute a basis for asserting, supporting or denying a claim to 25. territorial sovereignty in Antarctica.”(25)---- avoiding the A)By B)From C)About claims issue in this way, it was possible to produce a treaty that many parties could sign. Unfortunately, this means that(26)---- many countries follow the spirit of D)Along E)Without cooperation of the Treaty, there are still disputes over territory that remain unresolved and come up from time to time. 26. A)as B)while C)if D)until E)before 22. A) Instead B)For example C)At least D)In short E) Similarly 23. A) were to sign B)had to sign C)must sign D)may sign E) used to sign 5 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde 29. Despite the political upheavals in the Arab world, tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. ----. 27. In order to make the first vessels to cross stretches A) the Middle East is gaining ground to become one of of water, ----. the world’s popular tourist destinations A) ancient civilizations depended heavily on these for B) business boom, in places like Dubai and Abu Dhabi, their survival and expansion has had little impact on the economies B) the Greeks brought the art of rowing to a level of C) the airlines are rapidly expanding their routes in perfection that has never been surpassed Europe and Asia C) early attempts were often unique to the societies that D) emphasis on new policies is required to overcome originated them recession in these countries D) people had already developed them for such E) stability, strong economic growth and value for purposes as fishing and transporting goods money are the key factors of economic mobility E) early humans employed materials ranging from animal skins to small pieces of timber 30. Whereas there are undoubted social benefits to increasing home ownership, ----. 28. While several other minerals are needed for muscle A) the mortgage companies that finance home buyers function, ----. can go bankrupt A) knowledge of your body and its functions can be a B) there are some economic problems associated with great ally in health matters it B) most of the calories in the food we eat are used by C) more and more people prefer to buy homes than our muscles rent C) the contours of the body alter as the muscles D) the existing laws make it financially more attractive strengthen to purchase D) exercise is a vital ingredient for keeping the human E) incentives to rent houses still remain at historically body in good health low levels E) continuous intake of calcium helps to maintain a healthy skeleton 6 31. No matter how good the food we eat is, if it is not 33. ----, you can work on extinguishing any undesirable well digested, absorbed into the blood and behaviours. assimilated into the cells, ----. A) Unlessyou proceed to the interviewer’s office for A) we can, in time, develop ptoms and nutritional your interview deficiency B) Although previous work experience is sought by B) food must be well chewed and mixed with saliva almost all employers nowadays C) Once you are able to see yourself interacting with C) an alkaline environment is needed for the next stage others of digestion D) Whereas there is much to be learned about human D) it reaches the stomach where it is mixed with pepsin nature in general E) Just as any communicative event requires at least E) the breakdown of the protein in food begins here one person to be around 34. It might not be practical to use a different password 32. ----, Indian culture was primarily oral, with a high for every single website that you log into ----. value placed on recounting tales and dreams. A) so online shopping involves more than just a seller and a buyer A) No matter how extraordinarily diverse Indian customs and culture have been B) although it is more suggestible for someone to rely on a computer engineer B) As native American Indians evolved into complex hierarchical societies that practiced human sacrifice C) since nicknames on the Internet are not enough to protect you from harm C) Even though the first Indians began constructing earthen burial sites and fortifications around 600 BC D) while the term ‘surfing’ has become more widespread as more people use computers D) If all European emigrants had left their homelands to escape political oppression E) but it is definitely worth having more than one for security reasons E) Although some North American tribes developed a type of hieroglyphics to preserve certain texts 7 35. The nests birds leave behind provide clues about their lives and environment ----. A) as the architectural complexity of these nests hardly untangles their genealogy B) just as archaeological sites supply glimpses of human history C) but nest-collecting was a popular boyhood hobby in the 19th century D) despite the fact that they remain a largely untapped scientific resource E) before they lay eggs in order to sustain the continuation of their species 36. ----, not only cell operators but also law enforcement have come under fire for exploiting personal data without the user’s knowledge. A) After the companies have agreed widely on privacy policies B) Although law enforcement units permit users to reach all sites C) Since market demand is driving some of the biggest collectors of data into piracy D) As smart phones’ tracking abilities have become more sophisticated E) Now that banking transactions via mobile devices are almost completely secure 8 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye 38. For the last 20 years, there has been an ongoing anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye argument as to whether jazz is no longer an anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. exclusively American let alone an Afro-American 37. Most of the fears that we had when we were children music. are actually quite profound, but as we grow older and become more self-sufficient, the reality of fears A) Son yirmi yıldır, Afro-Amerikan müziği olmaktan diminishes. çıktığı varsayılan cazın sadece Amerikan müziği olup olmadığını sorgulayan bir tartışma A) Çocukken yaşadığımız korkuların çoğu, aslında bulunmaktadır. oldukça derindir ancak büyüyüp kendimize daha fazla yeter hâle geldikçe korkuların gerçekliği azalır. B) Son yirmi yılın süregelen tartışması, Afro-Amerikan müziği olmasından ziyade, cazın artık tamamıyla Amerikan müziği olup olmadığıdır. B) Çocukken aslında çok derin birçok korku yaşarız fakat büyüyüp daha çok kendimize yettikçe bu korkular gerçekliğini yitirir. C) Son yirmi yıldır, cazın Afro-Amerikan müziği olmasını göz ardı eden ve tamamen Amerikan müziği olduğunu savunan bir tartışma C) Çocukken yaşadığımız korkuların çoğu, aslında süregelmektedir. oldukça derin boyuttadır ancak büyüyüp kendimize daha fazla yeten bireyler hâline geldiğimizde bu D) Son yirmi yıldır, Afro-Amerikan müziği olmasını korkular zamanla ortadan kalkar. bırakın, cazın daha ne kadar Amerikan müziği olarak anılabileceği tartışılmaktadır. D) Çocukken yaşanılan korkuların çoğu, aslında oldukça derindir fakat kendimize yetecek kadar büyüdüğümüzde bu korkular gerçekliğini kaybeder. E) Son yirmi yıldır, Afro-Amerikan müziği olmasını bir kenara bırakın, cazın artık yalnızca Amerikan müziği olup olmadığı konusunda süregelen bir tartışma E) Çocukken yaşadığımız korkuların çoğu, aslında mevcuttur. oldukça derin olsa da büyüyüp kendimize daha fazla yettikçe bu korkular gerçek olmaktan uzaklaşır. 39. Patriarchy originally meant superiority of the father and used to be employed by sociologists to describe family structures where the father rather than the mother was dominant. A) Ataerkillik, esasen babanın ayrıcalığını ifade etmekteydi ve toplum bilimciler tarafından anneden ziyade babanın baskın olduğu aile yapılarını tanımlarken kullanılırdı. B) Ataerkillik, özünde babanın hâkimiyeti anlamını taşımaktaydı ve toplum bilimciler tarafından anneden ziyade babanın baskın olduğu aile yapılarını ele alırken kullanılırdı. C) Ataerkillik, ilk olarak babanın üstünlüğü anlamına sahipti ve toplum bilimciler tarafından anneden ziyade babanın ön planda olduğu aile yapılarını tasvir etmek için kullanılırdı. D) Ataerkillik, başlangıçta babanın üstünlüğü anlamına gelmekteydi ve toplum bilimciler tarafından anneden ziyade babanın baskın olduğu aile yapılarını tanımlamak için kullanılırdı. E) Ataerkillik, aslen babanın üstünlüğü anlamına gelmekteydi ve toplum bilimciler tarafından anneden ziyade babanın sözünün geçtiği aile yapılarını vurgulamak için kullanılırdı. 9 40. Oyunlara ve özellikle çocuk oyunlarına ilişkin 42. Kendine ait önemli rezervleri bulunmayan dünyanın inançlarımız, teknoloji ve küreselleşme ile köklü en büyük enerji tüketicisi Avrupa Birliği, ihtiyaç değişimler geçirmiştir. duyduğu enerjinin % 50’sini ithal etmektedir ve ithal enerjiye olan bağımlılığının 2030 yılına kadar % 70’e A) We seem to have radically changed our beliefs çıkacağı tahmin edilmektedir. about plays, and children’s plays in particular, because of advances in technology and A) The world’s largest energy consumer without its own globalization. significant reserves, the European Union imports 50% of the energy it needs, and it is predicted that B) We believe that plays, and children’s plays in its dependence on imported energy will rise to 70% particular, have encountered radical changes due to by 2030. technology and globalization. C) Our beliefs about plays, and children’s plays in B) As the world’s largest energy consumer, the particular, have undergone radical changes with European Union has no important energy reserves, technology and globalization. and it is envisioned that its dependence on imported energy will increase to 70% by 2030, on the assumption that it buys 50% of its energy from other D) Owing to the radical changes in plays, and children’s countries. plays in particular, we have shifted our attitude towards technology and globalization. C) As the world’s largest energy consumer with its limited energy reserves, the European Union imports around 50% of the energy it needs, and it will E) As to technology and globalization, our beliefs about probably be more dependent on energy import with a plays, and children’s plays in particular, have 70% increase by 2030. changed radically. D) Besides being the world’s largest energy consumer today which lacks its own reserves, the European Union imports 50% of the energy it requires, and it is foreseen that its energy import will go up to 70% by 41. Anadolu'daki arkeolojik kalıntılar, zeytin ağacının 2030. çok eskilere dayandığını ve aynı zamanda zeytinyağının faydalarını insanların bildiğini gösteren deliller sunmaktadır. E) The European Union is the world’s largest energy consumer without its own significant energy A) Archaeological remains in Anatolia have revealed reserves, and it is estimated that its reliance on the fact that the olive tree grew in the very distant imported energy will rise to 70% by 2030, while it is past and humans knew the benefits of olive oil as 50% now. well. B) In Anatolia, archaeological remains show that the olive tree was in existence in the very distant past and humans were also aware of the benefits of olive oil. C) Archaeological remains in Anatolia provide proof that the olive tree dates back to the very distant past, as does human knowledge of olive oil’s benefits. D) The olive tree and human knowledge of olive oil’s benefits date back to the very distant past as archaeological remains in Anatolia show us. E) Remains in archaeological sites in Anatolia proves that olive tree depends on the very distant past and humans benefited from olive oil in many ways. 10 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. It is stated in the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. History is one of the few school subjects commonly A) some countries have been more successful in mandated in education systems throughout the world. producing more neutral and less ideological history Furthermore, the use of history textbooks to support textbooks than others student learning is an almost universally accepted B) in many nations, debates over the content and practice. However, the widespread international format of history textbooks continue to generate presence of the humble history textbook should not considerable political conflict disguise its ideological and cultural potency. Indeed, essential to understanding the power and importance of C) nations attempt to provide future generations with history textbooks is to appreciate that in any given particular values that will ensure the continuation of culture they typically exist as the keepers of ideas, existing structures values and knowledge. No matter how neutral history textbooks may appear, they are ideologically important, D) history textbooks have become more politicized after because they often seek to inject the youth with a the emergence of nation states to preserve national shared set of values, national ethos and an identity incontrovertible sense of political orthodoxy. Textbooks stand as cultural artefacts that embody a range of E) many educational systems throughout the world issues associated with ideology, politics and values include history in their curriculum to enhance which in themselves function at a variety of different political literacy levels of power, status and influence. Embedded in history textbooks are narratives and stories that nation states choose to tell about themselves and their 45. According to the passage, regardless of how relations with other nations. Typically, they represent a impartially they are written, history textbooks ----. core of cultural knowledge which future generations are expected both to assimilate and support. A) need to teach both the past and the future B) serve a purpose other than intended C) are the best options for cultural transmission D) affect ideologically the youth more than adults 43. According to the passage, history textbooks ----. E) can never be completely objective and neutral A) are now being rewritten with a more international and universal outlook to rectify past 46. It can be inferred from the passage that the author misunderstandings between nations ----. B) are not appropriate for teaching history because they A) is in favour of using history textbooks to inform are always ideologically biased people about international relations B) sets out to emphasize the use of history textbooks to C) should be written in a neutral and unbiased way so instil national values in the young generation that future generations can have a healthy understanding of history C) is of the opinion that textbooks on history are easy to write D) not only have educational, but also ideological functions, serving to transmit a nation state’s values D) believes in the necessity of locally produced history textbooks to bring about world peace E) consist of baseless stories and narratives rather E) is trying to persuade the reader of the importance of understanding history than historical facts that are more important for a nation state’s survival 11 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. It is implied in the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A) widespread use of antibiotics is intended to eliminate Farmers in many countries utilize antibiotics in two key the chances of a possible pandemic ways: at full strength to treat animals that are sick and in low doses to fatten meat-producing livestock or to prevent veterinary illnesses. Although even the proper B) using a low dose antibiotic compared to a heavy use of antibiotics can inadvertently lead to the spread of dose is highly recommended for farmers drug resistant bacteria, the habit of using a low dose is a formula for disaster: the treatment provides just enough antibiotic to kill some but not all bacteria. The germs that C) human beings should test the efficacy of using survive are typically those that happen to bear genetic antibiotics on other animals before using them on mutations for resisting the antibiotic. They then poultry reproduce and exchange genes with other microbial resisters. As bacteria are found literally everywhere, D) increased antibiotic resistance in human beings is resistant strains produced in animals eventually find due to the consumption of animal products with their way into people as well. You could not design a antibiotic content better system for guaranteeing the spread of antibiotic E) antibiotic resistance in poultry animals has led resistance. To cease the spread, Denmark enforced scientists to find alternative solutions to fight off tighter rules on the use of antibiotics in the raising of these bacteria poultry and other farm animals. The lesson is that improving animal husbandry – making sure that pens, stalls and cages are properly cleaned and giving animals more room or time to mature – offsets the initial 49. According to the passage, ----. negative impact of limiting antibiotic use. A) the spread of bacterial infections in poultry may not be avoided by improving physical conditions B) the weight of the poultry mainly depends upon the environment they are brought up in 47. It is understood from the passage that ----. C) strict regulations in Denmark are employed to A) farmers mainly prefer using antibiotics as a minimize the effects of antibiotic use on both poultry preventive measure for diseases and people B) antibiotics are merely useful in treating the D) the maturation period of poultry in Denmark is contagious diseases of farm animals determined by the size of the animal C) continuous and heavy doses of antibiotics are crucial for poultry E) the productivity of poultry can best be analyzed through the amount of the antibiotic used on the D) antibiotics are so far the only effective method to animal fatten up meat-producing animals E) poultry prices are affected by the spread of contagious diseases 50. It is stated in the passage that antibiotics ----. A) are crucial as they change the genetic mutations of poultry B) form the basis for microbial resistance of genes in animals C) are effective in restricting resistant strains of bacteria in poultry D) are employed to prevent a possible disease spread from farm animals to human beings E) may produce drug resistant bacteria, irrespective of how carefully they are used 12 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. According to the passage, Germany ----. cevaplayınız. A) had to be stripped of its power to start wars “The Marshall Plan was not a simple program for transferring massive sums of money to struggling countries, but an explicit – and eventually successful – B) was unable to continue its industrial development attempt to reindustrialize Europe.” say Erik Reinert and during World War II Ha-Joon Chang. It follows that if Africa really wants economic prosperity, it should study and draw valuable C) needed industrial equipment and American finance to rebuild the country lessons from the Marshall Plan’s dark twin: the Morgenthau Plan implemented in Germany in 1945. D) found the Morgenthau Plan problematic as its Reinert tells the story best: When it was clear that the economy declined Allies would win the Second World War, the question of what to do with Germany, which in three decades had E) was allowed to industrialize despite its agricultural precipitated two World Wars, reared its head. Henry potential Morgenthau Jr, the US secretary of the treasury, formulated a plan to keep Germany from ever again threatening world peace. Germany, he argued, had to 53. It is implied in the passage that ----. be entirely deindustrialized and turned into an agricultural nation. All industrial equipment was to be A) America’s vision for post-war Europe was in essence destroyed, and the mines were to be flooded. This misguided program was approved by the Allies and was immediately implemented when Germany capitulated in B) a country has no choice but to prioritize one sector 1945. However, it soon became clear that the over another in order to advance Morgenthau Plan was causing serious economic problems in Germany: deindustrialization caused C) today’s Africa and post-war Germany have a lot in agricultural productivity to plummet. This was indeed an common interesting experiment. The mechanisms of synergy D) Erik Reinert and Ha-Joon Chang were right in their between industry and agriculture worked in reverse: predictions about the Marshall Plan killing the industry reduced the productivity of the agricultural sector. E) plans made by policy makers may yield unexpected outcomes 54. The main concern of the author is to ----. A) supply a brief summary of imperial nations’ 51. It is clearly stated in the passage that the Marshall domination of others Plan ----. B) blame America’s programs for Germany’s agricultural productivity A) was redesigned as the Morgenthau Plan to be applied in Germany C) learn from the failings and achievements of some economic policies B) was very comprehensive in its scope to develop Europe D) describe ways of industrializing through agriculture in order to stop wars C) was a program of investment from which the Allies expected to benefit directly E) accuse the African leaders of failing to understand how Germany prospered D) was ill-formed for its objectives according to Erik Reinert and Ha-Joon Chang E) turned out to be a failed attempt to industrialize various European nations 13 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. According to the passage, the global banking crisis cevaplayınız. was resolved because governments ----. Imagine an industry that runs out of raw materials. A) cooperated closely with the industry Companies go bankrupt, workers are laid off, families suffer and associated organizations are thrown into B) sold off large supplies of cash turmoil. Eventually, governments are forced to take drastic action. Welcome to global banking, recently C) involved the necessary organizations brought to its knees by the interruption of its lifeblood – the flow of cash. In this case, we seem to have been D) bought new supplies of vital materials fortunate. In the nick of time, governments released reserves in order to start cash circulating again. But E) acted quickly to find a solution what if the reserves had not been there? What are we going to do when our supplies of vital materials such as fish, tropical hardwoods, metals like indium and fresh 57. The main point made in the passage is that ----. water dry up? We live on a planet with finite resources – that is no surprise to anyone – so why do we have an A) industries need to look carefully at the raw materials economic system in which all that matters is growth used – more growth means using more resources. When the human population was counted in millions and B) the economic system currently in place must be resources were sparse, people could simply move to rethought new pastures. However, with 9 billion people expected around 2050, moving on is not an option. As politicians C) population explosion is one of the greatest threats to reconstruct the global economy, they should take heed. mankind as it requires more planning If we are to leave any kind of planet to our children, we D) all governments should have a responsibility to help need an economic system that lets us live within our out in times of crisis means. E) the global banking system can throw the world into turmoil 55. The author starts the passage with an example from 58. It is pointed out in the passage that in the past ----. industry in order to ----. A) an economic system of growth was easy to establish A) explain why raw materials are used in industry B) resources were more valuable than they are today B) present the conditions of the workers who are C) it was easy for people to find new resources currently employed D) industry was far less dependent on raw materials C) indicate the possible consequences of global industrialization E) it was rare for businesses to actually fail D) emphasize the importance of raw materials E) describe the impact of the banking system on industry 14 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. According to the results of the study funded by the cevaplayınız. World Anti-Doping Agency, ----. Many athletes credit drugs with improving their A) the study participants were all aware they were given performance, but some of them may want to thank their a placebo brain instead. Mounting evidence suggests that the boost from human growth hormone (HGH), an B) those who knew that they were given real drugs increasingly popular doping drug, might be caused by failed to show improvement in fitness tests the placebo effect. In a new double-blind trial funded by the World Anti-Doping Agency, in which neither C) the athletes who did not know they were given a researchers nor participants knew who was receiving placebo did well on fitness tests HGH and who was taking a placebo, the researchers D) the preliminary findings showed the increased asked participants to guess whether or not they were on popularity of drugs the real drug. Then they examined the results of the group who guessed that they were getting HGH when, in E) the effects of HGH are incompatible with those found fact, they had received a placebo. That group improved in other studies at four fitness tests measuring strength, endurance, power and sprint capacity. The study participants who guessed correctly that they were taking a placebo did 61. It is understood from the passage that the placebo not improve, according to preliminary results presented effect ----. at the Society for Endocrinology meeting in June 2011. “The finding really shows the power of the mind” said A) is highly esteemed among those who are interested Ken Ho, an endocrinologist at the Garvan Institute in in athletics Sydney, Australia, who led the study. She maintains that many athletes are reaping the benefits of the placebo B) can play a significant role in improving the effect, without knowing whether what they are taking is performances of athletes beneficial or not. C) has been monitored in the participating groups that consist of people taking doping drugs D) was also tested in other branches of sports where competition exists E) was very high in the studies where participants were informed in advance 59. It is clearly stated in the passage that the support given by certain drugs ----. A) is largely accepted for its positive contribution to 62. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. performance A) external interventions may have negative impacts on B) has been proven by many studies around the world one’s performance B) every athlete should be involved in a study to C) has led authorities to take the necessary measures increase his or her performance against these drugs C) success lies in the power of one’s mind no matter D) has been openly disputed by most of the athletes which treatment he or she is exposed to D) the World Anti-Doping Agency should be much more E) results in the improved performances of all the careful about the use of drugs in sports athletes who take them E) much more research should be done on the placebo effect among athletes 15 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Timur: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  Do you know the difference between the use of bulunuz. barbecues and conventional gas cooking? 63. Emre:  What’s so funny that you’ve been laughing now Levent: for hours?  ---- Figen: Timur:  I was just remembering a friend of mine who owns  What can be done to reduce this? a shoe shop. He was very upset because he realized that many customers were trying to Levent: squeeze their feet into shoes that were too small,  I think we should use gas over barbecue as it and were ruining his shoes. contributes to an increase in smog levels. Emre: A) Burning charcoal releases carbon monoxide into the  ---- air much more than cooking with gas does. Figen:  Even so, I just can’t help laughing. B) Well, actually, both are good ways of cooking, but barbecues take longer to prepare. A) That must have been quite an experience for him. Now he won’t let anyone try on different sizes. C) Gas cooking is far more efficient than using a barbecue, as you can adjust the heat according to B) Doesn’t the salesman have any rights? He should be your needs. able to fill out some kind of complaint form. D) Unfortunately, both are harmful and cause damage to the environment. C) Being a frequent shoe-buyer myself, I don’t know where your friend’s store is. E) Gas appears to be more dangerous as there is a high risk of explosion. D) Perhaps he should start selling other things. This way, he won’t have to deal with those customers anymore. E) I don’t find it amusing whatsoever. The customers should have been more careful with what they were doing. 16 65. Teacher: 66. Jale:  Your son has adapted quite well socially. He’s had  Here is an article about how people react in no problems making friends. Also, he’s quite a emergencies. Researchers say that when more leader among them. people are around, it reduces the chances of actually being helped. Parent:  I’m glad to hear that. What about his class work? Adnan:  ---- Teacher:  ---- Jale:  Apparently, onlookers provide a model for action. Parent: If they are docile and disinterested, the situation  He's never been very good at sitting still and may seem less serious. focusing. Adnan: A) His math skills are very good, but he needs to work  I think if there is only one bystander, your chance harder on his language skills. of being helped increases, as he will think he must B) He enjoys group work, probably because he likes to help immediately. socialize so much. A) Is an individual aware that others are present? C) I think he needs a private tutor to help him with the more difficult subjects. B) How did they carry out that research? D) I really enjoy having him in class because he’s such a good example to others. C) Do they offer any explanation as to why this E) He has the ability but he seems to lack the happens? concentration to do the work. D) Is this finding true for all cultures? E) Who were the participants in this research? 17 67. Ayça: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en  Do you think environmental factors like diet and yakın cümleyi bulunuz. stress affect the ageing process as much as the decline of hormonal systems? 68. Science does not produce a unified picture of the environment on which all can agree, instead it Berkan: provides multiple views, each of which may be valid  ---- from a particular ideological angle. Ayça: A) There is not one single view of the environment that  So, you mean physiological and environmental can be provided through science that everyone will factors contribute to one’s longevity to the same agree on, rather it gives different perspectives, all of which are valid depending on the ideological degree. perspective. Berkan:  Definitely! I also think living in an extended family and playing an important role in society bring in B) The environment has been described by scientists in some beneficial effects. many different ways rather than in just one way, and each of these have their own validity according to A) I don’t believe dietary habits and lifestyle have much the observer’s own ideology. to do with ageing. It’s all about the gradual failing of the body to be able to repair itself and replace cells. C) Science represents many diverse and particular B) I heard some people live longer and have fewer ideological angles, and from these a valid and health problems than others thanks to their unified description of the environment can be easy-going lifestyle and the amount of vegetables produced that respects multiple views. they consume. C) Perhaps, calorie restriction and anti-ageing treatments can be successful interventions that may cause increases in life expectancy. D) Scientists from different ideological backgrounds have come together to agree upon a unified picture of the environment on which scientists can all agree D) Even if ageing seems to be a serious problem for upon its validity. many people, some rely on plastic surgeries to cope with it. E) Multiple views on the environment are the result of E) Extending one’s lifespan isn’t simply a case of science being unable to produce a unified stopping the ageing process, because ageing isn’t a description upon which those from different scientifically recognized cause of death. ideological backgrounds can agree. 18 69. The stocks of bluefin tuna, the most valuable fish in 70. Huntington’s has been described as the most the world, have plummeted to such paltry levels that disastrous disease known to man because of its many scientists speculate that the fish could be peculiarly cruel characteristics, as it progressively headed for extinction. strips a person of control of his muscles, reason and emotion. A) Scientists believe that the excessive demand for the valuable bluefin tuna fish has risen to such a level A) Huntington’s disease is described as not only the that there is speculation about the fish becoming worst disease in the world but also the most cruelly extinct. progressive, as it slowly takes away a person’s ability to control their muscles, reason and emotion. B) Stocks of the world’s most desirable bluefin tuna fish have reached such a low level that many scientists B) To describe Huntington’s as a cruel disease could are convinced that they are about to become extinct. be disastrous as people know that it eventually takes away a person’s ability to control their muscles as well as to reason and feel emotion. C) There is some speculation among scientists around the world as to how far the stocks of the valuable C) Due to its cruel characteristics that gradually take bluefin tuna fish can be allowed to fall before they away a person’s control of their muscles, reason and become extinct. emotion, Huntington’s is said to be the most devastating disease in the world. D) Stocks of the bluefin tuna, the most expensive fish in the world, have dropped to such a low level that D) When a person starts to rapidly lose control of his scientists are predicting that they might become muscles and no longer is able to reason or control extinct. his emotions, he can be described as having the most disastrous disease ever – Huntington’s. E) The most expensive fish in the world is the bluefin tuna, but scientists fear that stocks will soon reach a E) When a man is described as having Huntington’s, it paltry level and the fish will become extinct. can be a very cruel experience, as they will gradually experience certain characteristics such as lack of muscle control, reason and emotion. 19 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada 71. The changing climate will have negative effects on anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek all parts of the world; depending on people’s cümleyi bulunuz. location and lifestyles, however, there will be great differences in the subsequent health hazards that 72. Most measurements of happiness are by human populations face. standardized questionnaires or interview schedules. It could also be done by informed observers – those A) No matter how and where people live, the who know the individual well and see them subsequent health hazards will be terribly great after regularly. ---- Yet, another form of measurement is to the varying climate negatively affects all regions of investigate a person’s memory and check whether the world. they feel predominantly happy or unhappy about their past. Finally, there are some crude but B) Based on their lifestyles and geographical location, ever-developing physical measures looking at human populations all over the world will experience everything from brain scanning to saliva levels. health risks to be brought about by adverse effects of the changing climate. A) It should be kept in mind that such tests might be misleading in many cases. C) Whether all regions of the world will be negatively affected by the incremental climate change largely B) Findings suggest that ancestors of Finnish people depends on people’s location and ways of life, yet made use of such methods. human populations will end up with health risks. C) There is also experience sampling, where people D) Since all parts of the world are likely to be adversely report how happy they are many times a day. influenced by the globally changing climate, human populations have been subject to resultant health D) Being objective in this process is more important risks, regardless of how and where they reside. than being an observer. E) A question still remains unanswered: to what extent E) All regions of the world will be adversely affected by can one express happiness on a sheet of questions? the changing climate, but the resulting health risks to human populations will vary greatly, depending on where and how people live. 73. Everything in the factories of the future will be run by smarter software. Digitization in manufacturing will have as widespread an effect as in other industries that have gone digital, including photography, publishing and films. Such effects will not be confined to large manufacturers, either. ---- Launching new and innovative products will become easier and cheaper for them. A) The materials being used to make things are changing faster than they were in the past. B) In addition, it will allow things to be made economically in much smaller quantities. C) Nonetheless, companies are also optimistic about a manufacturing revival. D) In fact, these developments will empower smaller firms and individual entrepreneurs. E) As such, companies from all over the world use China and India as low-wage workshops. 20 74. ---- This is not the case, and evidence for early 75. Stephen Hawking, the famed theoretical physicist learning and remembering comes from several diagnosed with Lou Gehrig’s disease, lost the ability studies. In one, infants only a few hours old learned to speak thirty years ago. In the meantime, a to turn their heads right or left, depending on computerized voice generated by an infrared sensor whether they heard a buzzer or a tone. In order to inside Hawking’s mouth has allowed him to taste a sweet liquid, the baby had to turn to the right communicate. According to a recent report, when a tone sounded and to turn to the left when however, the muscles controlling the device have the buzzer sounded. In only a few trials, the babies been deteriorating, limiting him to as little as one were performing without error. word per minute. ---- This is a horrifying prospect for the scientific community that has benefitted greatly A) It was once thought that infants could neither learn from his findings. But a new device recording brain nor remember. functions at an unprecedented level of detail was developed and has been proposed to improve B) Infants can discriminate differences in taste shortly Hawking’s ability to communicate once again. after birth. A) Such devices can be used to monitor the sleep C) Newborn infants could distinguish human voices pattern and the disorders of the deaf. from other sounds. D) Newborn babies may not remember what they have B) The sensor in the mouth is an effective way to just learned. continue communication with people unable to E) Pre-birth experiences in the uterus help infants to speak. learn and remember. C) Without a new means of communication, Hawking runs the risk of being rendered mute. D) The muscles in the mouth can be kept under control by using a great variety of equipments. E) Thanks to recent developments, researchers are now able to keep the disease under control as in Hawking’s condition. 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan cümleyi bulunuz. 76. (I)Using herbs from your garden or the farmer’s market to enhance the flavour of your summer cuisine is really rewarding.(II)Not only will herbs add subtle accents to your main dishes and salads, but they will also bring fragrance and interest to favourite dessert and beverage recipes.(III)If you are not using fresh herbs, remember that dried herbs are very potent, so reduce the amount you use by half or more.(IV)Include your home-grown produce in a salad course, and specimens from your gorgeous summer flower beds in a welcoming table centrepiece.(V)Also,if you are cooking outdoors, be sure to allow enough time to heat the grill for your vegetables, steaks and chicken. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V 21 77. (I)Aristotle explored the apparent ties between odour 80. (I)No citizen of the European Union lives more than and memory in his work On Sense and the Sensible. 700 km away from the coast.(II)The seas and oceans (II)Since then, people have speculated that the are at the centre of a large number of interactions, and memories elicited by smell are more intimate and to optimize political decision-making, we must clearly immediate than other recollections.(III)When we understand these interactions.(III)The European Union experience certain smells, we often find ourselves taken is surrounded by four seas and two oceans, and has back in time to a specific event or scene.(IV)Many 89,000 km of coastline.(IV)The maritime areas under movies of the 1980s include scenes that trigger the jurisdiction of the member states of the European memories of childhood and school years.(V)For Union are larger than the land masses.(V)The obvious example, the smell of a salsa, a sauce eaten with conclusion is the need for rational management of the Mexican food, may remind a person of watching James seas and oceans. Bond movies on television with his or her father while dipping chips in the spicy sauce. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V 78. (I)Five to six million farmers in the tropics who cultivate the cacao trees from which cocoa is produced rely on the sales of the seeds to feed themselves and their families.(II)Cacao tree grows only in a narrow band within about 18 degrees north and south of the Equator. (III)They extract the seeds, often called‘beans’, from football-shaped pods and then ferment and dry them to form butter and powder.(IV) The livelihoods of another 40 to 50 million depend on the long production road whereby the cacao seeds travel from a farm to the candy on store shelves.(V)InIvory Coast, which produces 40 percent of the world’s cocoa, such farming accounts for a full 15 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employs 5 percent of households. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V 79. (I)One of the oldest methods of preserving food is drying.(II) It slows down the proliferation and activity of the bacteria that cause spoilage and decay, but it considerably alters the appearance of food due to the loss of water.(III) With the success of freezing and its characteristics for retaining the food value of ingredients, drying is no longer an essential means of preserving food for times when it may be out of season or expensive.(IV)Since prehistoric times, cereals and fruits have been dried in the sun before being stored. (V)The drying of fruits and vegetables has been widely practiced for so long; in Greece for grapes, in Turkey for apricots, and in Iran and Spain for tomatoes. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V TEST BİTTİ. 22 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. SINAVDA UYULACAK KURALLAR 1. Sınav salonları kamera ile kayıt altına alınacaktır. Kamera kayıtlarının incelenmesinden sonra sınav kuralla- rına uymadığı tespit edilen adayların sınavları Yönetim Kurulunca geçersiz sayılacaktır. 2. Cep telefonu ile sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Çağrı cihazı, telsiz, fotoğraf makinesi vb. araçlarla; cep bilgi- sayarı, kol ya da cep saati gibi her türlü bilgisayar özelliği bulunan cihazlarla; silah ve benzeri teçhizatla; müsved- de kâğıdı, defter, kitap, sözlük, sözlük işlevi olan elektronik aygıt, hesap cetveli, hesap makinesi, pergel, açıölçer, cetvel vb. araçlarla sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Bu araçlarla sınava girmiş adayların adı mutlaka Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak, bu adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacaktır. Sınava kalem, silgi, kalemtıraş, saat vb. araçla ve kulaklık, küpe, broş vb. takı, herhangi bir metal eşya ile girmek de kesinlikle yasaktır. Yiyecek, içecek vb. tüketim malzemeleri de sınava getirilemez. Adaylar sınava şeffaf şişe içerisinde su getirebilecektir. 3. Bu sınav için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır. Sınav başladıktan sonra ilk 110 ve son 15 dakika içinde adayın sınavdan çıkmasına kesinlikle izin verilmeyecektir. Bu süreler dışında, cevaplamayı sınav bitmeden ta- mamlarsanız cevap kâğıdınızı ve soru kitapçığınızı salon görevlilerine teslim ederek salonu terk edebilirsiniz. Bildirilen sürelere aykırı davranışlardan adayın kendisi sorumludur. 4. Sınav salonundan ayrılan aday, her ne sebeple olursa olsun, tekrar sınava alınmayacaktır. 5. Sınav süresince görevlilerle konuşmak, görevlilere soru sormak yasaktır. Aynı şekilde görevlilerin de adaylarla ya- kından ve alçak sesle konuşmaları ayrıca adayların birbirinden kalem, silgi vb. şeyleri istemeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. 6. Sınav sırasında, görevlilerin her türlü uyarısına uymak zorundasınız. Sınavınızın geçerli sayılması, her şeyden önce, sınav kurallarına uymanıza bağlıdır. Kurallara aykırı davranışta bulunanların ve yapılacak uyarılara uymayanların kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. 7. Sınav sırasında kopya çeken, çekmeye kalkışan, kopya veren, kopya çekilmesine yardım edenlerin kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve bu adayların sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. Adayların test sorularına verdikleri cevapların dağılımları bilgi işlem yöntemleriyle incelenecek, bu incelemelerden elde edilen bulgular bireysel ya da toplu olarak kopya çekildiğini gösterirse kopya eylemine katılan adayın/adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacak ayrıca 2 yıl boyunca tarafından düzenlenen tüm sınavlara başvurusu yasaklanabilecektir. Sınav görevlileri bir salondaki sınavın, kurallara uygun biçimde yapılmadığını, toplu kopya girişiminde bulunulduğu- nu raporlarında bildirdiği takdirde, bu salonda sınava giren tüm adayların sınavını geçersiz sayabilir. 8. Cevap kâğıdında doldurmanız gereken alanlar bulunmaktadır. Bu alanları doldurunuz. Cevap kâğıdınızı başkaları tarafından görülmeyecek şekilde tutmanız gerekmektedir. Cevap kâğıdına yazılacak her türlü yazıda ve yapılacak bütün işaretlemelerde kurşun kalem kullanılacaktır. Sınav süresi bittiğinde cevapların cevap kâğıdına işaretlenmiş olması gerekir. Soru kitapçığına işaretlenen cevaplar geçerli değildir. 9. Soru kitapçığınızı alır almaz kapağında bulunan ilgili alanları doldurunuz. Size söylendiği zaman, sayfaların eksik olup olmadığını, kitapçıkta basım hatalarının bulunup bulunmadığını ve soru kitapçığının her sayfasında basılı bulu- nan soru kitapçık numarasının, kitapçığın ön kapağında basılı soru kitapçık numarasıyla aynı olup olmadığını kontrol ediniz. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfası eksik ya da basımı hatalıysa değiştirilmesi için salon başkanına başvurunuz. Size verilen soru kitapçığının numarasını cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru Kitapçık Numarası” alanına yazınız ve kodlayınız. Cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru kitapçık numaramı doğru kodladım.” kutucuğunu işaretleyiniz. Soru kitapçığı üzerinde yer alan Soru Kitapçık Numarasını doğru kodladığınızı beyan eden alanı imzalayınız. 10. Sınav sonunda soru kitapçıkları toplanacak ve ’de incelenecektir. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfalarını koparmayı- nız. Soru kitapçığının bir sayfası bile eksik çıkarsa sınavınız geçersiz sayılacaktır. 11. Cevap kâğıdına ve soru kitapçığına yazılması ve işaretlenmesi gereken bilgilerde bir eksiklik ve/veya yanlışlık ol- ması hâlinde sınavınızın değerlendirilmesi mümkün olamamaktadır, bu husustaki özen yükümlülüğü ve sorumluluk size aittir. 12. Soru kitapçığının sayfalarındaki boş yerleri müsvedde için kullanabilirsiniz. 13. Soruları ve/veya bu sorulara verdiğiniz cevapları ayrı bir kâğıda yazıp bu kâğıdı dışarı çıkarmanız kesinlikle yasaktır. 14. Sınav salonundan ayrılmadan önce, soru kitapçığınızı ve cevap kâğıdınızı salon görevlilerine eksiksiz olarak teslim etmeyi unutmayınız. Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve doğacak tüm mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) 07 NİSAN 2013 İNGİLİZCE 1. A 21. D 41. C 61. B 2. D 22. A 42. A 62. C 3. C 23. C 43. D 63. E 4. E 24. D 44. C 64. A 5. B 25. A 45. E 65. E 6. D 26. B 46. B 66. C 7. C 27. E 47. A 67. B 8. A 28. E 48. D 68. A 9. B 29. A 49. C 69. D 10. E 30. B 50. E 70. C 11. D 31. A 51. B 71. E 12. D 32. E 52. A 72. C 13. C 33. C 53. E 73. D 14. E 34. E 54. C 74. A 15. D 35. B 55. D 75. C 16. A 36. D 56. E 76. E 17. E 37. A 57. B 77. D 18. B 38. E 58. C 78. B 19. D 39. D 59. A 79. C 20. E 40. C 60. C 80. B T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (İlkbahar Dönemi) 1 NİSAN 2018 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. 2018-Y DS Spring/English This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. Architectural analysis is not only a ---- academic expression to fill the space. pursuit, done for its own sake, but it can be informative and entertaining as well. A)mutually B)convincingly 1. Gender studies is a multifaceted field of inquiry into social structures and social relations that has C)drastically D)purely important ---- for the study of violence, peace and conflict. E)deniably A)challenges B)divisions C)implications D)drawbacks E)requirements 5. Childcare is a broad term that ---- services which protect the health, safety, and well-being of children who require custodial care by adults other than their own parents for a temporary period of time. A)hinders B)encompasses 2. Nano-tech products can potentially save lives as well as give us hundreds of new conveniences from C)creates D)eliminates enhanced drug delivery and disease ---- to fabric that will not stain. E)suspends A)progression B)manipulation C)detection D)transmission E)inheritance 6. Taking a break, and distracting your mind for a while, not only gives you the spare time to be creative, but it can also give your brain the space it needs to ---- creative solutions to problems you have been struggling with. 3. The thin, invisible layer of gas surrounding the A)make up for B)get away from Earth, which is called the atmosphere, shields us from the vacuum of space and protects us from ---- C)fight back against D)look up to solar radiation. A)delicate B)excessive E)come up with C)vigorous D)elaborate E)swift 1 2018-Y DS Spring/English 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. By 2.5 million years ago, when they began ---- stone word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). tools, early humans had understood that they ---- the natural world to their own advantage. A) to have made / had to alter 7. A number of studies have concluded that a given level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere ---- less B) to make / used to alter warming than previously ----. A) is producing / to think C)making / could alter B) has produced / thinking D)having made / should have altered C)produces / thought E) to have been making / must have altered D)has been producing / having thought E) had produced / being thought 10. Dramatists and scriptwriters could place their characters ---- the centre of a terrifying human conflict, and may allow us to watch these characters suffer the pains of avoiding a collision ---- the conflict. 8. Anyone who ---- unusual reactions to antihistamines A)on / for B)over / in C)at / with (medicines that relieve or prevent the ptoms of some kinds of allergy) in the recent past ---- his or D)to / about E)by / from her physician know before taking the drugs again. A) used to have / might let B) had had / must have let C)was having / could let D)has had / should let 11. ---- the problems of obesity and disordered eating growing around the world, public health E) had / might have let professionals have focused research efforts on identifying potential causes and treatments ---- these related problems. A)About / in B)On / towards C)With / for D)Through / from E)Among / at 2 2018-Y DS Spring/English 12. ---- there is no consensus among folklorists on how 15. In statistics, ---- the standard deviation allows us to to define folklore nor how to explain the issues of see how much individuals vary within a sample, ---- the meaning and the function of it, folklore generally the standard error allows us to estimate how much refers to cultural expressions, such as narratives, samples will vary within a population. music, dance, beliefs and festivals. A)whether / or B)no sooner / than A)Once B)While C)Until C)rather / than D)hardly / when D)As E)In case E)just as / so 13. Industrial nations consume nearly 75 to 80 percent of the fossil fuels burned each year; ----, they are 16. The idea of the Internet was initially to provide responsible for the majority of greenhouse gas redundancy of communications ---- a catastrophic emissions. event like a nuclear blast, which might destroy a single connection or computer but not the entire A)instead B)on the contrary network. C)as a result D)for example A)such as B)on behalf of E)however C)in terms of D)in addition to E)in case of 14. Buildings such as the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Turkey date back to the sixth century and yet are still standing ---- they are located in earthquake-prone areas. A)as long as B)unless C)as if D)although E)since 3 2018-Y DS Spring/English 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19. passage. A)regardless of B)rather than Fossil fuel use is one of the main causes of climate C)as opposed to D)due to change and the greenhouse effect. (17)----, we must significantly reduce carbon dioxide emissions from E)in spite of activities like heating and transportation. One option would be to (18)---- to renewable energy sources wherever possible,such as solar, hydropower, wind or geothermal systems. Another important step isto reduceour individual energy footprint. For example, driving a car places a particularly high burden on the environment (19)---- the carbon dioxide emissions into the air. Yet, we should keep in mind that there are several ways to lessen the impact and still continue 20. (20)---- cars.For instance, by choosing (21)---- many new A)to have used B)being used energy-saving models, we can help reduce harmful emissions. C)using D)to be used E)having used 17. A)Conversely B)Similarly C)Otherwise D)However 21. A)from B)onto E)Therefore C)at D)towards E)over 18. A)confine B)object C)switch D)accommodate E)respond 4 2018-Y DS Spring/English 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)coincidentally B)vaguely When fighting fat, and trying to eat healthily, changing C)truly D)partially your eating environment is easier than changing your mind. A research team in the US has set about E)seemingly uncovering the hidden persuaders in our homes that trick us (22)----overeating – things like serving spoons, cupboards and colours. But most of these tempters can also be reversed to make us slimmer and healthier. (23)---- there are many solutions to mindless eating, most of them will go undiscovered because if we have a problem with our diet, we tend to focus on food itself, not on our surroundings. All that requires willpower, which is hard work and has to last a lifetime to be 25. (24)---- successful. Research has found subtle ways to A)due to B)instead of change our homes, workplaces, schools, or modify our approach to restaurant dining and grocery shopping, so C)with regard to D)in terms of we mindlessly eat less (25)---- e ating more. If we want to automatically eat better, we do not need to change our E)together with minds, we (26)---- our surroundings. 22. 26. A)against B)into C)without A)have to optimise B)must have optimised D)behind E)off C)may have optimised D)could have optimised E)would optimise 23. A)Given that B)Just as C)Before D)Unless E)Although 5 2018-Y DS Spring/English 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. Although alchemy began as a way to turn other option to complete the given sentence. metals into gold, ----. A) it matured into a system of thinking about nature that contributed to the development of modern chemistry 27. Because of its power and potential for both harm and good, ----. B) alchemistic ideas and practices flourished in the A) modern meteorology has made notable improvements ancient world within several cultural traditions in the critical discipline of predicting severe weather C)a number of spectacular failures eventually led to the B) meteorologists are the only professionals who can disappearance of alchemy in China keep their jobs and still be wrong half the time D)alchemists continued in their relentless quest for gold C)scientists have studied cloud seeding with the goal of well into the sixteenth century making it rain in places experiencing prolonged droughts E) its objectives were to find ways of accelerating the rates at which metals could be changed into gold D)the weather has been a subject of intense interest and scrutiny by human beings since ancient times E) it seems unlikely that we will ever get to the point of being able to predict the weather with 100 percent accuracy 30. Although the available evidence shows no use of colour or decoration on early footwear, ----. A) the existence of twenty-five-thousand-year-old clothing suggests that footwear may be older than is even presently known 28. Forensic investigators must collect evidence B) the elaborate weaving on some shoes seems to while the crime scene is still fresh ----. indicate that prehistoric people would care about the A) because forensic science is the use of scientific appearance of the shoes methods to investigate crimes C)prehistoric shoes had to resist heavy usage, whether B) since forensic scientists study evidence at the homes made from leather or from plant fibers and workplaces of suspects D)the oldest known shoes are ten-thousand-year-old C)although it is the job of forensic scientists to provide sandals found in a desert area of eastern Oregon evidence at a criminal trial of the US D)even if the area is unsafe and they have to work under E) prehistoric humans would make their shoes shortly armed guard after killing animals, such as sheep and deer E) as many sciences, from chemistry to engineering, are used in an investigation 6 2018-Y DS Spring/English 31. While most research on the role of genetics and the 33. Some birds build nests simply to protect their young heritability of aggression has ruled out the idea of ----. an aggressive gene, ----. A) since many small animals that live above the ground A) most definitions of aggression indicate that it make their homes in trees represents behaviours that are intended to hurt or harm another B) until they have learned how to look after themselves and survive in the wild on their own B) it is currently thought that one might inherit the biological susceptibility for being aggressive C)given that they make mud huts that are placed in all kinds of places, from undergrowth to fence posts C)one of the most widely discussed theories of aggressive behavior is Albert Bandura’s social D)although sometimes a squirrel takes over an empty learning theory bird's nest and makes its home there D)there are a number of different ways to conceptualise E) while colonies of wasps build their nests from the top subtypes of aggressive behaviours downward E) much of the research on aggression has focused primarily upon children who are physically aggressive 34. Of the 20 amino acids that make up all proteins, 9 are considered essential ----. 32. ----, it will not be possible to turn a draft into a A) if thousands of proteins are assembled from some 20 different amino acids finished piece of work. A) Although an author may have a hard time evaluating B) as the best sources of complete protein are lean what he or she has written meats, fish, low-fat dairy products, and eggs B) Even if an author thinks that characterisation is poor in C)even if some foods are better sources of protein than his or her work others C)Unless an author knows the strengths and D)because they cannot be made in our bodies and must weaknesses of a manuscript be obtained from the foods we eat D)Because an author should realise that revision turns E) although the proteins in the foods we eat are digested an amateur into a professional first into small peptides E) When rewriting and polishing lead an author to produce a good novel 7 2018-Y DS Spring/English 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. Trans fat may be as harmful to your health as English, and the most accurate English translation saturated fat ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) because it increases blood cholesterol levels, among other adverse effects 37. Since the 1970s, media literacy has developed B) although major sources are hardened vegetable fat through the work of educators who have such as margarine implemented programs to explore mass media, popular culture, and communication technologies C)as long as foods high in saturated fat include red with children and young people. meats and dairy products A) Medya okuryazarlığı, kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve D)since a diet that has generous amounts of iletişim teknolojilerini çocuklar ve genç insanlarla vegetables is naturally lower in fat keşfetmek için çalışan eğitimcilerin yaptığı programlar sayesinde 1970’lerden beri gelişmektedir. E) even if a diet high in fat can also be unnecessarily B) 1970’lerden beri medya okuryazarlığı, çocuklarla ve high in calories genç insanlarla kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve iletişim teknolojilerini keşfetmek için programlar uygulayan eğitimcilerin çalışmaları aracılığıyla gelişmektedir. C)Çocuklar ve genç insanlarla kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve iletişim teknolojilerini keşfetmek için programlar düzenleyen eğitimcilerin çalışmaları sayesinde medya okuryazarlığı 1970’lerden 36. ----, he was foremost an inventor and more günümüzdeki hâline gelmiştir. interested in attracting public interest in his work than advancing scientific knowledge. D)Medya okuryazarlığının gelişmesi çocuklarla ve genç A) When the philosopher Alfred North Whitehead insanlarla kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve iletişim famously credited Thomas Edison with the discovery teknolojilerini keşfetmek için 1970’lerden beri of a method of invention programlar uygulayan eğitimcilerin çalışmaları sayesinde olmuştur. B) While Thomas Edison saw himself as a member of the larger scientific community and presented papers E) Kitle iletişimini, popüler kültürü ve iletişim teknolojilerini before the National Academy of Sciences keşfetmek üzere 1970’lerden beri çocuklara ve genç insanlara uygulanan programlar eğitimcilerin C)As Thomas Edison began his inventive career by çalışmalarıyla birlikte medya okuryazarlığını becoming a contract inventor in the telegraph industry geliştirmiştir. after working as a telegraph operator in the mid-1860s D)Because Thomas Edison depended more on the assistance of a large staff of experimenters and machinists who made important contributions to his inventive efforts E) Although reputation was significant for Thomas Edison, particularly because of his popular image as the primary inventor of several new technologies 8 2018-Y DS Spring/English 38. As members of households established complex 40. Karşılaştığımız bütün problemleri eşit derecede relationships with outsiders during the agrarian era, iyi çözemeyebiliriz, çünkü her bir problem farklı ve they came under the influence of new rules, yaratıcı bir çözüm gerektirebilir. structures, and expectations. A) We cannot solve all the problems we encounter A) Hane fertleri, tarım dönemi boyunca yabancılarla equally well because we may need to develop a çeşitli ilişkiler kurarak yeni kuralların, yapıların ve unique and creative solution to each problem. beklentilerin etkisi altına girmişlerdir. B) The reason why we may not deal with all the problems B) Hane fertlerinin yabancılarla karmaşık ilişkiler we confront equally well is that each problem may kurması tarım dönemine denk gelmiştir ve bu require a different and innovative solution. dönemde yeni kurallardan, yapılardan ve beklentilerden etkilenmişlerdir. C)Because each problem may call for a distinct and creative solution, all the problems we face cannot be C)Tarım döneminde hane fertlerinin yabancılarla çeşitli settled equally well. ilişkiler kurmasının sebebi; yeni kuralların, yapıların ve D)We may not be able to solve all the problems we beklentilerin etkisi altına girmiş olmalarıdır. confront equally well since each problem might D)Tarım döneminde hane fertleri yabancılarla karmaşık require a different and creative solution. ilişkiler kurdukça yeni kuralların, yapıların ve E) We could not overcome all the problems we encounter beklentilerin etkisi altına girmişlerdir. equally well now that a different and innovative E) Yeni kuralların, yapıların ve beklentilerin etkisi altına solution may need to be produced for each problem. giren hane fertleri, tarım döneminde yabancılarla daha karmaşık ilişkiler kurmuşlardır. 39. More than a hundred different studies have shown that there really is a significant relation between happiness and physical health. A) Yapılan yüzden fazla farklı çalışma göstermiştir ki mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli bir ilişki bulunabilir. B) Mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasındaki önemli bir ilişkinin gerçekliği, yüzden fazla farklı çalışma sayesinde ortaya konmuştur. C)Mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli bir ilişki olup olmadığını göstermek için yüzden fazla farklı çalışma yapılmıştır. D)Yüzden fazla farklı çalışma, mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli bir ilişki olduğunu göstermiştir. E) Yüzden fazla farklı çalışmaya göre, mutluluk ile beden sağlığı arasında gerçekten önemli bir ilişki olabilir. 9 2018-Y DS Spring/English 41. 20. yüzyılın başlarında Albert Einstein adında genç 42. Çıraklık sistemleri Avrupa ve Asya ülkelerinde bir Alman, klasik fiziği sarsarak ve mutlak bir zaman yaygın bir biçimde kullanılagelmiş olsa da Birleşik ve uzay fikrini sonlandırarak görelilik kuramını öne Devletler'dekinden biraz farklı bir biçimde sürdü. işlemektedir. A) At the turn of the 20th century, a young German A) Although apprenticeship systems have been used named Albert Einstein proposed his theory of relativity, widely in European and Asian countries, they operate shaking classical physics and ending the idea of an in a somewhat different manner than those in the absolute time and space. United States. B) European and Asian countries have been widely using B) A young German named Albert Einstein shook apprenticeship systems that operate in a slightly classical physics at the beginning of the 20th different manner than the United States. century and put forward his theory of relativity, ending the idea of an absolute time and space. C)Apprenticeship systems are widely used not only in European and Asian countries but also in the United C)At the turn of the 20th century, a young German States, but in a somewhat different manner in the named Albert Einstein shook classical physics and former. ended the idea of an absolute time and space by proposing his theory of relativity. D)Both European and Asian countries and the United States have been widely using apprenticeship D)Proposing his theory of relativity at the turn of the 20th systems, but the latter has been practising it in a century, a young German named Albert Einstein slightly different manner. shook classical physics and ended the idea of an absolute time and space. E) There is a slight difference between the apprenticeship systems in European and Asian countries and those in E) The theory of relativity, proposed by a young German the United States, though both have been widely used named Albert Einstein at the beginning of the 20th for a long time. century, shook classical physics and ended the idea of an absolute time and space. 10 2018-Y DS Spring/English 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. It is pointed out in the passage that the tap water ----. A) can dramatically increase the severity of diseases due Pick up a glass, fill it from the tap and take a sip. to the variety of compounds found in it You just had a tiny dose of the pill your neighbour took days before. Excreted and flushed through our sewage B) contains drugs that have been found to be illegal as works and waterways, drug molecules are all around us. they are harmful for human health A recent analysis of streams in the US detected an entire pharmacy: diabetic medications, muscle C)makes it possible for us to determine the types of pills relaxants, opioids, antibiotics, antidepressants and our neighbours take every day more. Drugs have even been found in crops irrigated by treated waste water. The amounts that end up in your D)contains medicinal leftovers, which can pass on to us glass are minuscule, and will not lay you low tomorrow. when we drink water from our taps However, someone prescribed multiple drugs is more E) does not pose any threats for human health because likely to experience side effects due to these small most of the drugs dissolve quite well in it doses, and risks rise exponentially with each drug taken by a person over 65. “These drugs have been individually approved but we have not studied what it means when they are together in the same soup,” says Mae Wu at the National Resources Defense Council (NRDC). 45. What can be inferred from Mae Wu's words? A) The combination of medical waste in the tap water creates a very hazardous toxic soup. 43. Which of the following can be true about the tap B) She believes that drinking tap water can cause serious water in the US? side effects in most people. A) The drugs in the tap water are not expected to have C)The NRDC is planning to study the effects of drugs immediate side effects on healthy people. when they are together in the same mixture. B) There can be a lower risk for elder members of society D)Despite being approved individually, all drugs can be who take more than one drug a day. dangerous when mixed with tap water. C)Most drugs in the tap water are harmless, but illegal E) She is unsure of the health effects of the combination ones can make people sick. of small doses of different drugs in the tap water. D)It is more likely for a person to be affected if there are multiple drug residues in the tap water. E) The tap water used in houses does not cause negative effects for adults at all. 46. What is the main purpose of the author? A) To blame the US authorities for failing to take precautions against drug leftovers B) To catch the attention of academicians to find a solution to the problem of contaminated tap water C)To dissuade readers from continuing to use tap water in the US D)To warn readers against possible health risks that may be caused by tap water E) To call for more action from the NRDC in sterilising tap water 11 2018-Y DS Spring/English 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. How does a horned lizard defend itself when faced with a predator? A) It blends into its surroundings using its natural Admired by native peoples for thousands of years, the colouring and shape. Texas horned lizard has an array of abilities. It mostly eats ants – lots of them, and most parts of an ant’s body B) It freezes the predator with the help of its spines. are indigestible, which necessitates a huge stomach. Eating more than two hundred ants per day means C)It makes itself smaller than normal to confuse the exposure out in the open for long periods, and having a predator. ‘heavy’ stomach means that a horned lizard finds it difficult to run away from predators. Instead, it relies on D)It releases a kind of liquid to make the predator an armory of defences. It has camouflage colouring, suffocate. with an outline broken up by spines and outgrowths, and it will freeze if a predator approaches. Its horns and E) It changes its colour and shape to become more spines can pierce the throat of a snake or bird, and it threatening to its predators. can hiss and blow itself up to look even more fearsome. When it comes to coyotes, foxes, and dogs, a horned lizard’s most spectacular defence is to squirt foul-tasting blood from the sinuses behind its eyes. That usually has the desired effect. But it squirts only when it is provoked, since it risks losing up to one quarter of its blood. Such abilities are, however, no defense against human 49. It could be bad for a horned lizard to use its invasion of its land. Its strange shape and colouring has own blood for defence because ----. made it attractive to reptile collectors, and its habit of A) it might lose a high amount of blood, which would put freezing means that it is prone to being run over. its life at risk B) predators like the taste of the blood, making them more willing to eat it C)the bright colour of the blood could make it easy 47. For a horned lizard, eating too many ants means for predators to see it that it ----. A) has to spend more time to digest what it has eaten D)it is an ineffective way of defence when the predator is than to hunt for food a snake or bird B) is more vulnerable to predators while trying to run E) the smell of the blood could attract more predators away C)will become highly indigestible for its predators D)seems to get physically stronger in its struggle to survive in the wild 50. Upon contact with humans, a horned lizard ----. E) causes a huge decrease in the ant population living A) is often hunted by collectors due to being confused around its habitat with other reptiles B) attacks humans in an effort to defend its territory C)is likely to be run over because it does not move when in danger D)immediately changes its original shape and colour E) tries to escape by crawling rather than moving fast 12 2018-Y DS Spring/English 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. It is emphasised in the passage that Richard Aidan Martin ----. A) monitored great whites mistaking surfers and More mythology surrounds the shark than any scuba-divers for seals and sea lions other creatures in the ocean. This is partly a ptom of their colossal size – adult male great whites can B) focused especially on the disadvantages of great measure in excess of five metres; the temptation for whites’ notoriously poor vision humans to add a metre here or there after reported sightings is irresistable. Sharks are also, by nature, C)examined attacks on sea lions by great whites to mysterious. Scientists still know next to nothing about prove their aggressive nature great whites’ breeding habits; a birth in the wild has never been observed. One of the biggest great D)noted that great whites do not come closer to humans white shark myths is that the creature, disabled by its in an actively predatory way notoriously poor vision, often mistakes surfers and E) tried to collect precise information on great whites by scuba-divers for its main prey – seals and sea lions. observing 1,000 attacks on humans “Completely false,” says Richard Aidan Martin, director of the ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research in Vancouver, Canada. After observing 1,000 predatory attacks on sea lions by great whites for five years, he states that the sharks rocket to the surface and crush their prey with incredible force; however, they usually approach humans with leisurely or undramatic behaviour. Martin points out that great whites are 53. Which of the following is pointed out in the curious and investigative animals, which is what most passage? people do not realise. When great whites bite something A) Great whites confuse humans with seals and sea lions unfamiliar to them, whether a person or a sea creature, due to their low ability to see. they are looking for tactile evidence about what it is. They usually throw humans out of their mouth after B) Great whites bite humans to explore if their bones are an exploratory bite rather than swallow them for food to their taste. because humans are too bony. To add more, great whites must be extremely selective about their diet. C)Great whites are often incapable of choosing the right Their digestive tracts function very slowly, and eating food for their diet. the wrong thing would slow the shark down for days and stop them from consuming anything else. D)Great whites avoid biting humans and sea creatures that are unfamiliar to them. E) Great whites' diet does not include humans because they have too much bone for them. 51. It is understood from the passage that great whites ----. A) have hardly ever been examined in terms of their breeding habits 54. Which could be the best title for this passage? B) are mysterious because why they mainly prey on seals and sea lions has not been clarified A) The Extraordinary Diet of Great Whites C)are giant creatures whose size can never be B) The Unknown World of Great Whites measured exactly C)Deadly Attacks of Great Whites on Humans D)have been studied more extensively than any other creatures in the ocean D)The Impressive Size of Great Whites E) have unusual breeding habits to which scientists have E) Enormous Diversity of Great Whites’ Prey been paying particular attention 13 2018-Y DS Spring/English 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. What can be understood about Humperdinck? A) He was criticised for presenting Hansel and Gretel differently from the previous versions of it. The story of Hansel and Gretel, in which two children B) He intentionally highlighted some details of Hansel outsmart a witch who is about to destroy them, was and Gretel to increase its popularity. passed down to us from the brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm. They began recording various folk tales C)He reached a large audience especially attracted told to them by villagers and farmers near the town of to the opera but not to the story of Hansel and Gretel. Kassel, Germany, in about 1807. Hansel and Gretel was told to the brothers by a young girl, Doretchen Wild, who D)He made Hansel and Gretel quite famous by years later became Wilhelm Grimm's wife. The fairy producing a children's opera inspired by the story. tale gained wide popularity after German composer Engelbert Humperdinck made it the basis of a children's E) He removed the traumatising part of Hansel and opera, first introduced in Munich in 1893. However, the Gretel to create a more cheerful story. opera, as well as subsequent versions of the story, omits the most traumatising aspect of the traditional tale: the parents’ deliberate abandonment of their children to the wild beasts of the forest. Another important feature of Hansel and Gretel is that it was not only known through German oral tradition. A version circulating in France as early as the late 17thcentury 57. The saddest part of Hansel and Gretel is that ----. had a house made not of gingerbread but of gold and jewels, in which a young girl is held by a giant whom she A) a giant in France is pushed into a fire by a little girl eventually pushes into his own fire. However, it was the Grimm brothers who immortalised the tale for future B) the children's parents are not aware of the dangers of generations – an excellent story that every child wild beasts in the forest throughout the world should come across. C)the parents do not care for their children and cause them to get caught by a witch D)despite the presence of wild beasts, the children are left alone in the forest without any concern 55. Which of the following can be said about the story E) a young girl is captured in a giant's house of Hansel and Gretel? A) It was initially written by the Grimm brothers and became very popular in a short time. B) It illustrates the dangers faced by two children who lived in Kassel, Germany, in about 1807. C)It reveals the typical features of German culture 58. What is the Grimm brothers' impact on the story of because it is told by villagers and farmers. Hansel and Gretel? A) They gave inspiration to many other arts, and showed D)It was verbally transferred to the Grimm brothers like a fairy tale can be a product of popular culture. some other stories. B) They recorded one of the diverse versions of the E) It was told by Doretchen Wild to the villagers and story and made it universally known as a children's farmers in Kassel, Germany. literature must-read. C)They added a new dimension to children's literature by telling a story which has wild beasts and witches trying to catch children. D)They proved that the important thing is to record a story so it can be used in other cultural activities. E) They showed that traumatising events can be used as instructions for children. 14 2018-Y DS Spring/English 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. What motivated Piccard to fly around the world in a solar-powered plane? A) His desire to follow in his family’s footsteps and In Bertrand Piccard’s family, there is a tradition of being continue their tradition of being first first. His grandfather, Auguste, was the first person to ride a balloon into the stratosphere. His father, Jacques, B) His awareness of the need to develop environmentally was the first to reach the Earth’s deepest point, the friendly, cost-effective engineering Pacific’s Mariana Trench. And in 1999, Piccard completed the first non-stop, around-the-world balloon C)His previous success and his desire to be flight. This feat, plus an environmentally conscious environmentally friendly approach to innovation, spurred the renowned Swiss adventurer to dream of circumnavigating the globe in a D)His attempt to make the world’s first balloon flight plane that uses no fuel. The result is the Solar Impulse 2, an aircraft equipped with more than 17,000 solar E) His knowledge of green technologies and his family’s cells. Thanks to lithium batteries that efficiently store concern about pollution and energy problems energy reserves, it is the first solar-powered plane that can fly through the night. “If we want to solve our pollution and energy problems,” says Piccard, a psychiatrist by training, “we need to increase our energy efficiency and focus on clean technologies. Solar Impulse 2 is really a way to show that those technologies are mature.” 61. What is clearly stated as being unique about Piccard’s aircraft? A) It has more solar cells than any aircraft built before it. B) It runs completely on the cleanest lithium batteries. 59. What can be inferred about Piccard’s father and C)It has very efficient energy storage means, which will grandfather? allow it to fly at night. A) They preferred to follow their dreams rather than have careers. D)It uses solar cells for power, allowing it to fly without fuel or the need to ever stop. B) They were not afraid of taking risks and pursuing their dreams. E) It reserves all the energy it gains from the solar cells in lithium batteries. C)They were both renowned scientists in their fields. D)They were very supportive of Piccard’s ambitions. E) They were just as concerned about the environment as Piccard. 62. In Piccard’s own words, what is the main purpose of Solar Impulse 2? A) To show that a plane with no fuel is able to fly around the world B) To indicate that more needs to be done to further develop solar-powered planes C)To contribute to the improvement of lithium batteries’ efficiency D)To demonstrate that the technology available today is ready to help solve pollution and energyproblems E) To prepare the world for the next generation of clean technologies 15 2018-Y DS Spring/English 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Researcher: option to complete the dialogue.  From your documentary, we learned that Princess Diana secretly collaborated with journalist Andrew Morton to write a book about her life, in 63. Reporter: which he discloses details of her troubled  Kids love to eat hamburgers, but they're not very relations with the royal family. healthy. Tell us about the public school initiative to make lunches healthier for students. Documentarist:  Well, when the book was published in 1992, Dietician: Diana’s cooperation was a secret. But, when  With some help from food engineers, we've Morton republished the book after her death in created a mushroom-beef blend that's being used 1997, he exposed the fact that Diana herself was in schools across the country to help students eat the direct source for many revelations in the book. healthier. Reporter: Reporter:  ----  ---- Documentarist: Dietician:  He wanted to bring an important fact to light; the  True. In addition to fewer calories and saturated Princess herself wanted the public to know she fats than regular hamburgers, this blend is also a was not living a fairy tale, but a life of misery. greener alternative to meat since mushrooms are A) Why did Morton’s book change the way the world more sustainable than beef. looked at the royal family? Reporter: B) Do you think the public was as deeply affected as  That makes sense as they require fewer resources Morton by Diana’s death? than livestock to produce. A) I think there are more than just health benefits to using C)How could Morton convince people that his book was this vegetable and meat blend. based on Diana’s own words? B) It seems that the health benefits are the most positive D)What may have prompted Morton to reveal Diana’s thing about this vegetable and meat blend. involvement in the publication? C)As far as I understand, blending mushrooms with beef E) How did Morton deal with the criticism from the royal requires some careful procedures. family and the British media? D)I don't think this is a more sustainable alternative to traditional meat hamburgers. E) Great! I think students will like eating this vegetable and meat blend at lunch. 16 2018-Y DS Spring/English 65. Journalist: 66. Professor:  You’re the co-leader of an international project to  And here you see a picture of a littledevil frog. drill for rock samples in the South China Sea. Why The male produces noisy sounds in pursuit of a is that sea bed of such interest? partner. Geophysicist: Student:  We want to answer questions about when it was  ---- formed to better understand continental movements. Professor:  Well, he's a poisonous frog and has bright Journalist: colours which warn predators that he's unsafe to  ---- eat. Geophysicist: Student:  We also plan to study the microbiology of the  How significant characteristics it has! ocean crust to see if there are new organisms at A) Do the sounds he makes differ or does he use the these great depths. same kind of sounds? A) What key questions do you hope to answer? B) How do the partners react to these sounds when they hear them? B) What kind of rocks do you expect to find? C)Is it really difficult for the little devil frog to find a C)How will you determine how old the rocks are? partner? D)What methods are you going to use to collect all these D)But doesn't it make him noticeable and vulnerable to samples? being attacked? E) What other things may this study help us understand? E) Is it only males, or do females also produce such sounds before mating? 17 2018-Y DS Spring/English 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Matthew: rephrased form of the given sentence.  A friend of mine plays in an orchestra and has invited me to their concert. I’m really nervous because I don’t know anything about orchestras. 68. While in Holland, John Locke had time to complete a Judy: number of important works that established his  Actually, most people don’t know much about reputation as England’s foremost political theorist. orchestras. Just pay attention to the instrument A) Whereas John Locke wrote many of his important categories, and then you’ll be less worried. works in Holland, he earned a reputation as the most important political theorist in England. Matthew:  ---- B) John Locke, who was famous for being England’s principal political theorist, spent some time in Holland Judy: to produce some of his most important works.  Well, each group sits together. First, you have the C)His stay in Holland, during which he completed most strings. Woodwinds are in the following section. of his important works, helped John Locke to be Behind them are the brass instruments, and at the accepted as one of the most significant political back is the percussion section. theorists of England. A) How do you know the features of all these categories? Have you ever taken a course about D)Thanks to several important works he finished during orchestras? his stay in Holland, John Locke made quite a name for himself as the leading political theorist of England. B) How exactly is a typical orchestra organised? If I learn that at least, maybe I can relax and enjoy the E) It was the countless important works he finalised in performance. Holland that earned him a name as one of the most prominent political theorists in England. C)As far as I know, you’ve attended several concerts before. Can you predict what will attract me most at the concert? D)What do you know about the percussion section? I think that’s the section my friend plays in. So, please tell me about it. E) I don’t even know the name of instruments played in an orchestra. Are there many different instruments? 18 2018-Y DS Spring/English 69. Delicately carved from mammoth tusk, the Lady of 70. While professional advertisers scoff at the idea, the Brassempouy was discovered in southwest France general public seems to assume that subliminal in 1894 and is among the oldest representations of a advertising is widely and effectively practiced. human face. A) Despite the fact that professional advertisers ridicule A) The oldest representation of a human's face is the public for believing in the widespread and efficient an 1894 mammoth tusk, delicate carving of the Lady use of subliminal advertising, the public still insists on of Brassempouy, which was found in southwest doing so. France. B) As professional advertisers praise this concept, an B) The Lady of Brassempouy, representing the oldest increasing portion of the population also believes that human face, was made from gently carved mammoth subliminal advertising is commonly and efficiently tusk and unearthed in southwest France in 1894. used. C)Professional advertisers appear to be praising the idea C)Found in 1894 in southwest France, the Lady of that subliminal advertising is generally practiced, an Brassempouy is one of the oldest representations of a assumption commonly held by the general public. human face, gently carved from the tusk of a mammoth. D)It appears that ordinary people believe subliminal advertising is extensively and successfully carried out D)Amongst many delicate mammoth tusk carvings of the although professional advertisers laugh at this notion. human face, the Lady of Brassempouy is the oldest and its discovery was made in southwest France in E) The general population thinks that there are some 1894. people who make use of subliminal advertising efficiently; however, professional advertisers seem to E) One of the oldest delicate human face carvings, the think the opposite. Lady of Brassempouy was identified in 1894 to be made of mammoth tusk in southwest France. 19 2018-Y DS Spring/English 72-75: For these questions, choose the best 71. The years following the 1789 revolution in France option to complete the missing part of the brought massive upheaval in French society, which, passage. in turn, produced profound changes in dress and fashion. 72. It has been a basic tenet that an individual who uses A) Although the revolution took place in France in 1789, it substances heavily will become addicted. There are was only after many years that French society went reports, however, of people becoming addicted to a through considerable changes in dress and fashion substance with exposure only once or a few times. following this great disturbance in their society. Some experts believe people are born with the B) The revolution in France in 1789 led to a serious predisposition to become addicted. ---- Thus, the disturbance among people in French society, and this potential for addiction may be hereditary. On the was the reason why the French had to allow for other hand, a psychological problem may lead the fundamental and important changes in dress and individual into addiction. The need for instant fashion. gratification, a feeling of being socially ostracized, and an inability to cope with the downfalls of life C)If it were not for the revolution in France in 1789, dress have all been cited as possible springboards to and fashion in French society might not have changed addiction. considerably despite the enormous disturbance it A) One characteristic that marks addiction, whether to caused in their society. chemicals or nonchemical practices, is the genetic D)What contributed to the revolution in France in 1789 modification it leads to. were the major changes in dress and fashion, which B) A careful medically-controlled withdrawal program can resulted from the huge confusion experienced by reverse the chemical changes in genes caused by the French society at that time. addiction. E) It was not until after the revolution in France in 1789 C)Habitual use of an addictive substance can produce that French society experienced dramatic changes in changes in body chemistry and any treatment must be dress and fashion, due to the enormous turmoil geared to a gradual reduction in dosage. generated by this period. D)Studies have found that many former addicts have enough determination to avoid drugs for the rest of their lives. E) Children of addicts have a greater probability of becoming addicts themselves than children whose parents are not. 20 2018-Y DS Spring/English 73. In almost all cultures and societies, children have 74. Fossils are remnants or traces of an animal or plant collected a broad spectrum of items. Although the of a past geologic age that have been preserved in activity seems to be universal, very little has been various ways in the Earth’s crust. From earliest written on this subject. And even though collecting times people must have seen fossils, but the first has played an important part in many individuals’ reports we have on the subject are from the ancient lives, it is seldom described in memoirs or Greeks. Xenophanes of the early Ionian school is autobiographies. This may be because many said to have noticed fossilised sea creatures high collections are suddenly abandoned when the on mountains; he correctly interpreted this as collector grows up. ---- Other collections, however, meaning that these mountains had once been under continue into adult life, becoming lifelong water. ---- For example, he associated the fossilised passionate occupations; this is especially likely with bones of large creatures with mythical animals or collections that have some kind of economic value with giant humans. or present the adult with challenges or opportunities A) In the 17th century, Nicolaus Steno argued for further study. persuasively that fossils are remains of living A) Most children will carry on adding to their collections organisms. throughout adulthood because they are so attached to them. B) In Roman times, Suetonius casually mentions that the emperor Augustus kept a collection of large fossil B) Many are often split up and disappear during bones in his villa. childhood unless parents understand the fascinating world of the small collector and pay special attention to C)The famous scholar Avicenna put forward an idea that saving them. confused people about fossils for centuries. C)The spirit of the collector, once established, never D)Later, Herodotus reached the same conclusion leaves the individual but is turned in new directions regarding fossilized clam shells, but he misinterpreted and can result in life-changing career choices. other fossils. D)Grand collections may end up in places like museums, E) Theophrastus, Aristotle’s successor, is said to have which seems to be the dream of collectors who do not written a book on fossils, which was lost later, where want their passionate investments to disappear with he refers to fossilised fish. them. E) Collecting trains the eye, creates a sense of order, and develops aesthetic appreciation, while at the same time creating a sense of economic appreciation for certain items. 21 2018-Y DS Spring/English 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 75. According to a World Bank report in1993, the East sentence in the passage. Asian miracle, achieving high economic growth for all people, is due to a combination of fundamentally sound development policies, tailored interventions, and an unusually rapid increase of physical and 76. (I)Across the globe, people greeted the end of World human capital. The more advanced economies in War II with a profound sense of relief. (II) By virtually any measurement, the war had been the most devastating the Asian region are part of this success and have conflict in human history. (III)The more traditional and been referred to as high-performing East Asian more widely accepted date for the start of World War II economies. ---- In addition, these economies have is 1 September 1939, with the quick but not quite displayed high per capita incomes, along with a blitzkrieg (lightning) German invasion of Poland. much-improved income distribution, compared with (IV)The war’s economic cost alone has been calculated most other developing economies. at perhaps five times that of World War I. (V) In human A) In contrast, the dramatic growth of the Asian tiger terms, it claimed half again as many military lives: economies has been based on the export of 15 million versus 10 million for World War I. manufactured goods. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V B) Poorer countries have greater difficulty than relatively richer countries climbing up the ladder of development. C)The study suggests that economies with a strong inward focus could not succeed. D)Such economies have a record of high and sustained economic growth. 77. (I)The idea of the human mind as the domain of absolute protection from external intrusion has persisted E) Promoting trade is positively related to levels of per for centuries. (II)Today, however, this presumption capita income. might no longer hold. (III)Sophisticated neuro-imaging machines detect the electrical activity of neurons, enabling us to decode and even alter the nervous system signals that accompany mental processes. (IV)Medical devices connected to the brain are vulnerable to sabotage, and neuroscientists suggest that the same vulnerability applies to brain implants. (V)Whereas these advances have a great potential for research and medicine, they pose a fundamental ethical, legal and social challenge: determining under what conditions it is legitimate to gain access to another person’s neural activity. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 22 2018-Y DS Spring/English 78. (I) The best conditions for dandelion seeds are relatively 80. (I)Established on 7 April 1948, the World Health calm, sunny days that generate thermal updraughts. Organisation (WHO) is one of the original agencies of (II) A 2003 study at the University of Regensburg in the United Nations. (II)WHO defines health not merely Germany found that 99.5 percent of dandelion seeds as the absence of disease or illness, but as a state of land within 10 metres of their plant. (III) That is because complete physical, mental, and social well-being. the seed 'parachute' falls at about 30 cm per second (III)Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, WHO was and dandelions only grow about 30 cm high. (IV) So, that set up to improve international cooperation for better gives each seed just one second of flight time to be health conditions across the world. (IV)It took over from blown sideways by the wind to its new home. (V) Higher the Health Organisation of the League of Nations and wind speeds do not really increase the distance the the International Public Office of Health in Paris. seeds fly, because strong winds tend to blow (V) Those two organisations had focused on the control downwards as well as sideways, so the seeds just land of epidemics, quarantine measures, and the even sooner. standardisation of drugs. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 79. (I)The conventional wisdom is that it is a molecule's specific shape that allows our noses to distinguish between one smell and another. (II)But there is new evidence that it is actually the frequency of a molecule's vibration, a quantum effect, that is all-important. (III)Most olfactory (smell) scientists believe that receptors within our noses act like a lock that can only be activated by a molecule of a specific shape – the 'key'. (IV)Molecules are collections of atoms that can be thought of as being connected by springs that can vibrate. (V)The trouble is, some molecules with different shapes have similar smells. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V END OF THE TEST 23 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS 2018 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ) 2018 - YDS İLKBAHAR 01-04-2018 1. C 48. A 2. C 49. A 3. B 50. C 4. D 51. A 5. B 52. D 6. E 53. E 7. C 54. B 8. D 55. D 9. C 56. D 10. C 57. D 11. C 58. B 12. B 59. B 13. C 60. C 14. D 61. C 15. E 62. D 16. E 63. A 17. E 64. D 18. C 65. E 19. D 66. D 20. C 67. B 21. A 68. D 22. B 69. C 23. E 70. D 24. C 71. E 25. B 72. E 26. A 73. B 27. D 74. D 28. D 75. D 29. A 76. C 30. B 77. D 31. B 78. A 32. C 79. D 33. B 80. B 34. D 35. A 36. B 37. B 38. D 39. D 40. D 41. A 42. A 43. A 44. D 45. E 46. D 47. B T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (Sonbahar Dönemi) 9 EYLÜL 2018 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. O 001 2018-YDS Fall/English This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. The Big Bang theory is the explanation most expression to fill the space. commonly ---- by astronomers for the origin of the universe. A)discovered B)accepted 1. For smokers who are under increased pressure to give up smoking, one of the easiest ---- is that C)regulated D)conducted quitting smoking makes people more likely to put on weight. E)influenced A)incentives B)attempts C)purposes D)excuses E)features 5. The relationship between sport and aggression has been studied ---- for decades, yet researchers still have a limited understanding of the link between the two. A)severely B)suspiciously 2. The primary ---- of an organisation’s accounting department are to process financial information and C)uniquely D)extensively to prepare financial statements at the end of the accounting period. E)instantly A)advancements B)compensations C)obstacles D)objectives E)classifications 6. Sense of control refers to the degree to which people believe that they can deliberately ---- desired outcomes and avoid undesirable ones in their environment. A)fill out B)bring about 3. Scholars and historians have offered possible locations for the mythical island Atlantis, even in C)switch off D)turn down the face of ---- scientific evidence that it does not exist. E)hand over A)compelling B)doubtful C)erroneous D)refutable E)ambiguous 1 2018-YDS Fall/English 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. Five of the Solomon Islands ---- whole by rising sea word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). levels, ---- a glimpse into the future of other low-lying nations, such as the Netherlands and Italy. A) are being swallowed / having offered 7. For a long time, scientists ---- aware that the Earth’s atmosphere is not static, but is in constant motion, B) had been swallowed / being offered producing areas of ever-changing pressure around the globe, but from 1700 onward, scientists ---- to C)will be swallowed / having been offered discover how and why large-scale atmospheric movements occur. D)were swallowed / offered A) had been / have begun E) have been swallowed / offering B) would have been / had begun C)have been / began D)would be / were beginning E) were / would have begun 10. Research ---- media has primarily examined the effects of media on children ---- a developmental perspective with a psychological focus on the correlation or causal variables between the media and children’s behaviour. A)against / under B)on / from 8. Science ---- our every question, but it ---- humanity’s best tool yet for tackling our greatest challenges. C)through / across D)in / beyond A) may not answer / had remained E)at / over B) must not answer / has remained C)should not answer / will remain D)cannot answer / remained E) might not answer / remains 11. Identifying the specific effects of beneficial microbes that thrive ---- the surface of our bodies and deep ---- our tissues, researchers are gaining a new view of how our bodies function. A)at / over B)in / along C)by / down D)on / within E)from / through 2 2018-YDS Fall/English 12. Most cheesemakers believe that the brilliant 15. Animals are hunted by humans ---- for their meat nuances of flavour found in raw milk, with its ---- for parts of their bodies that are used to create naturally present ‘good’ bacteria, simply cannot be medicines, clothes, and jewellery. duplicated in a pasteurised milk cheese ---- some A)neither / nor B)such / that well-respected cheeses, including British Stilton, are made only from pasteurised milk. C)not only / but also D)the more / the more A)now that B)after E)as / as C)although D)because E)only if 16. ---- its notoriety as a naval weapon, the first modern torpedo was developed in landlocked Austria, or rather in what was then the Austrian Empire 13. Surprisingly, the bol for zero emerged later than stretching down to the Adriatic. the concepts for other numbers, and ---- the A)Along with B)In terms of Babylonians used a bol for zero, it was merely a placeholder and not used for computational C)Despite D)Due to purposes. A)just as B)as if E)Instead of C)in case D)because E)even though 14. Studies have found that the effects of a cup of coffee or a glass of cola are noticeable after just 10 minutes ---- the peak caffeine concentration in the blood occurs after 45 minutes. A)since B)but C)provided that D)as long as E)unless 3 2018-YDS Fall/English 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 20. passage. A)provided B)once Sometimes when people assert that a language has no C)in case D)because grammar, what they really mean is that there is no grammar book for that particular language. But the rules E)even if of a language (17)----in the heads of speakers of that language. We know the rules are there (18)---- the way the speakers behave. They use similar structures (19)---- similar events. If you hear the sentence for “Give me some water.” in a rarely spoken language such as Spelitzian, you can be pretty sure you can use the same pattern for “Give me some food.”, (20)---- there are other possible patterns as well. If there were not any patterns, people would not be able to communicate 21. because they would have no way of knowing what other A)saying B)to say people meant (21)----. C)having said D)being said E)to have been said 17. A)alter B)recover C)endure D)apply E)exist 18. A)because of B)despite C)contrary to D)instead of E)similar to 19. A)against B)on C)from D)for E)into 4 2018-YDS Fall/English 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)for B)into C)about An electric car future is speeding closer – economic D)from E)to analysts project that a third of all automobiles could be battery-powered by 2040. Most of these vehicles (22)----large lithium batteries, which prompts worries about whether the world’s lithium supply can keep up. (23)----, another element, cobalt, is a bigger concern. The best lithium battery cathodes (negative electrodes) all contain cobalt, and its production is limited. Even with a very conservative estimate of 10 million electric vehicles (EVs) in 2025, the demand (24)----cobalt that 25. year could reach 330,000 metric tons, whereas the A)has not reduced B)will not reduce available supply at that time would be at most 290,000 metric tons. Recycling lithium batteries is complicated C)does not reduce D)did not reduce and rarely done. Even with higher rates and cheaper processes, recycling (25)---- the use oflithium batteries E)is not reducing until 10 or more years after mass-market penetration of EVs. But newer cathode chemistries offer hope. (26)----recently developed nickel-rich and cobalt-free formulations, cobalt demand may decline. 26. A)Rather than B)Similar to 22. A)call off B)rely on C)In comparison with D)As opposed to C)take in D)go through E)Thanks to E)cut down 23. A)Consequently B)In conclusion C)At least D)However E)Otherwise 5 2018-YDS Fall/English 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. While people can generally cough voluntarily, ----. option to complete the given sentence. A) infectious viruses can be easily transmitted between individuals through coughing 27. ----, but the creation of genetic techniques to safely B) most people cough once or twice an hour during the halt or reverse age-related conditions in humans day to clear irritants off the airway has so far proven improbable. A) Some researchers have doubts whether a new genetic C)environmental pollutants, such as cigarette smoke technique could be developed as a first step towards and dust, can also cause a cough the medical world’s fabled ‘elixir of youth’ D)the cough that accompanies a cold usually lasts one B) It has long been known that manipulating certain to two weeks genes in an organism can slow ageing and extend its lifespan E) vitamins and minerals may be helpful in treating conditions that lead to coughs C)More proof will be needed before new genetic treatments using stem cells can be promoted as the key to turning back the clock on old age D)Ageing of the body is a dynamic process, as often reported by a number of researchers E) The efficacy of new methods utilised to prevent ageing is still questionable 30. When mental disorders, physical conditions, and functional decline co-occur, ----. A) older adults face a greatly increased risk of hospitalisation and placement in long-term care facilities B) some older adults have been found to be relatively active well into their 80s and 90s 28. Because bodybuilders exert large amounts of C)it is important to note that older adults vary energy, ----. substantially in terms of their physical and mental A) they are judged on the physical appearance of their health muscles and encouraged to focus on body image D)physical decline is associated with causing a number B) they try to achieve the body type that will help them be of mental disorders among older adults effective competitors in their sport E) mental health problems such as depression are not a C)bodybuilding is the development of the physique natural consequence of growing older through exercise, often for competitive exhibition D)their metabolism generally requires more calories per day than the average person E) bodybuilding is an activity that includes weight training in order to build muscle mass 6 2018-YDS Fall/English 31. Unless there are substantial changes in the ways 33. ----, the nations of Europe raced to colonise the that humans affect ecosystems, ----. continent. A) we have already caused permanent losses in global A) Given that almost all European interaction with Africa biodiversity took place along the coasts until the 18th century B) our knowledge of Earth’s species is still incomplete B) Because African responses to the challenge of European imperialism were complex C)there could be as many as 30-50 million species on Earth C)Even if colonial administrations enticed or coerced Africans into producing goods for export D)there will be much larger losses of biodiversity in the near future D)When technological advances made Africa’s interior readily accessible in the late 19th century E) the scale by which we consider biodiversity ranges from local to global E) Despite several factors that drove the European scramble for Africa in the 18thcentury 32. ----, our very lives depend on it to sustain agriculture and to keep our bodies healthy. 34. ----, the Romans became the first major society to wear seasonal clothing. A) Since scientists have long struggled to comprehend the complexities of the weather A) Although Romans were very careful about the way they dressed B) Just as the Earth’s atmosphere would remain stagnant without weather B) As most of what we know about Roman clothing comes from written sources C) While cold weather might cause us discomfort or even more severe health conditions C)Because their empire grew so great and took them into very different climates D)Given that humanity has, indeed, changed the weather D)Even if Romans made warm winter boots and the first known raincoat E) If predicting the weather is still, in many ways, a haphazard occupation E) Whereas wealthy Romans had slaves to help choose their clothing 7 2018-YDS Fall/English 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. ----, the ethnic characteristics and traditions of the English, and the most accurate English translation Balkan Peninsula’s food culture have been well of the sentences in Turkish. preserved. A) Provided that it displays both Asian and western European influences 37. Intelligence, which has been open to a range of definitions due to its abstract nature and thus has B) Even if meat might not have played a central role in become a controversial topic, is usually regarded as the past a measure of cognitive skills and the ability to solve problems. C)Even though the eastern influence has been very A) Çoğunlukla bilişsel becerilerin ve problem çözme strong in the last several centuries yeteneğinin bir ölçütü olarak görülen zekâ, soyut doğasından ötürü bir dizi tanıma açık olduğu için D)As long as its food culture is shaped by the historic, tartışmalı bir konu hâline gelmiştir. social and climatic elements B) Zekâ, soyut doğası gereği bir dizi tanıma açık E) While the use of numerous spices constitutes the olup tartışmalı bir konu hâline gelse de genellikle basics of its cuisine bilişsel becerilerin ve problem çözme yeteneğinin bir ölçütü olarak görülmektedir. C)Genellikle bilişsel becerilerin ve problem çözme yeteneğinin bir ölçütü olarak görülen zekânın soyut doğası nedeniyle bir dizi tanıma açık olması, onu tartışılan bir konu hâline getirmiştir. D)Soyut doğasından ötürü bir dizi tanıma açık olan ve 36. The Sung dynasty Chinese (AD 960-1279) had the bu yüzden tartışmalı bir konu hâline gelen zekâ, technology to make rockets, ----. genellikle bilişsel becerilerin ve problem çözme A) so the first European picture of a rocket was made in yeteneğinin bir ölçütü olarak görülmektedir. 1400 E) Zekâ çoğu zaman bilişsel becerilerin ve problem B) thus it was occasionally used as a weapon by çözme yeteneğinin bir ölçütü olarak görülmüş, soyut Europeans doğası gereği bir dizi tanıma açık olmuş ve bundan dolayı tartışmalı bir konu hâline gelmiştir. C)because the earliest European recipe for black powder appeared in 1265 D)but there is no definitive evidence that they did so E) as the origin of the rocket is shrouded in mystery 8 2018-YDS Fall/English 38. World War I was supposed to be the war to end all 39. Today’s urban developments, coupled with an wars, but defeated countries were faced with increasing population, threaten many archaeological harsh peace terms, which led to the outbreak of sites in Egypt. World War II. A) Günümüzdeki kentsel gelişmeler, nüfus artışının da A) I. Dünya Savaşı’nın tüm savaşlara son verecek savaş etkisiyle birlikte, Mısır’daki birçok arkeolojik alan için olacağı düşünülüyordu, fakat yenilen ülkelerin ağır tehdit oluşturmaktadır. barış koşullarıyla karşı karşıya kalması sonucunda B) Mısır’daki birçok arkeolojik alan, günümüzdeki kentsel II. Dünya Savaşı gerçekleşti. gelişmeler ve artmakta olan nüfus yüzünden tehdit B) Tüm savaşlara son verecek savaş olacağı zannedilen altındadır. I. Dünya Savaşı’nda yenilen ülkeler ağır barış C)Günümüzdeki kentsel gelişmeler, artmakta olan koşullarıyla karşı karşıya kaldı ve bu durum II. Dünya nüfusla birlikte, Mısır’daki birçok arkeolojik alanı tehdit Savaşı’nın ortaya çıkmasına neden oldu. etmektedir. C)I. Dünya Savaşı’nın tüm savaşları sona erdirecek D)Günümüzdeki kentsel gelişmeler, nüfus artışını savaş olacağı zannediliyordu, ancak yenilen ülkeler beraberinde getirerek Mısır’daki birçok arkeolojik alan ağır barış koşullarıyla karşı karşıya kaldı, ki bu da için tehdit oluşturmaktadır. II. Dünya Savaşı’nın ortaya çıkmasına neden oldu. E) Günümüzdeki kentsel gelişmelerin artmakta olan D)II. Dünya Savaşı’nın gerçekleşmesine neden olan şey, nüfusla desteklenmesi, Mısırda'ki birçok arkeolojik I. Dünya Savaşı’nın tüm savaşlara son verecek savaş alanı tehdit etmektedir. olacağının düşünülmesine rağmen yenilen ülkelerin ağır barış koşullarıyla karşı karşıya kalmasıydı. E) I. Dünya Savaşı’nın tüm savaşları sona erdirecek savaş olacağına inanılsa da yenilen ülkelerin ağır barış koşullarıyla karşı karşıya kalması, II. Dünya Savaşı’nın ortaya çıkmasına neden oldu. 9 2018-YDS Fall/English 40. Makro fotoğrafçılığın en önemli tekniklerini 41. Hastalığın biyolojik doğası kültürden kültüre keşfetmek için, fotoğrafçılar bir bahçede ışık değişmese de hastalıkların nasıl algılandığının ciddi ve konumla çalışmalı ve ufak hareketlerle arka bir biçimde değişiklik gösterdiğine dair net kanıtlar planın nasıl değiştiğini fark etmelidir. vardır. A) The key techniques of macro photography include A) The biological nature of disease does not change from working with light and position in a garden, through one culture to another, though we have clear evidence which photographers can notice how the background showing that how diseases are understood is changes with slight moves. dramatically different. B) Discovering the key techniques of macro photography B) While the biological nature of disease differs slightly requires photographers to work with light and position from one culture to another, there is dramatic variation in a garden and to notice how the background in how diseases are understood, as shown by clear changes with their slight moves. evidence. C)To notice the key techniques of macro photography, C)Even if there is clear evidence suggesting that how photographers may work with light and position in diseases are understood varies dramatically from one a garden and discover how the background changes culture to another, the biological nature of disease in accordance with slight moves. remains constant. D)To discover the key techniques in macro photography, D)Although the biological nature of disease does not photographers need to work with different ranges of change from one culture to another, there is clear light and position in a garden and notice the changes evidence that how diseases are understood varies in the background caused by slight moves. dramatically. E) To discover the key techniques of macro photography, E) There is clear evidence suggesting that the biological photographers should work with light and position in a nature of disease does not change, but how diseases garden and notice how the background changes with are understood varies to a great extent from one slight moves. culture to another. 10 2018-YDS Fall/English 42. Akademik başarısızlığın önlenmesi ciddi bir konudur çünkü akademik başarısızlığa uğrayan çocuklar yaşamları boyunca önemli sosyal ve ekonomik problemler yaşarlar. A) It is important that academic failure is prevented since children who fail academically are likely to suffer from significant social and economic problems throughout their lives. B) Should academic failure not be avoided, which is a serious subject, children who fail academically face important social and economic problems throughout their lives. C)Prevention of academic failure is a serious subject because children who fail academically experience significant social and economic problems throughout their lives. D)As a subject, prevention of academic failure is serious because children who fail at school go through significant social and economic problems throughout their lives. E) What makes prevention of academic failure a serious subject is that children who fail academically have significant social and economic problems throughout their lives. 11 2018-YDS Fall/English 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. Why do online multiplayer games tend to be more addictive than others? A) They display more violence than other games. Video games are likely to affect the way we behave in a number of ways. For instance, there is concern about B) They lead to more conflicting behaviours. whether violence in games makes young people more violent. This is controversial even within the scientific C)They help some regions of the brain get bigger. community. Numerous studies about the effects of games on the brain have come up with conflicting D)They involve communication between players. results. A team of scientists gathered all scientific articles to date and compared results. In total they E) They contribute more to the functioning of the brain. found 116 experiments, the first from the 1980s. Many compared regular video game players with people who had never played. Changes in the brain were measured using techniques which detect whether brain regions increase or reduce in size and how these changes affect the brain’s activity. The study found that the clearest negative impact is the risk of addiction, which could affect other brain functions. Games that heavily rely on online multiplayer modes are the most 45. Which of the following questions cannot be associated with addiction, due to social interactions answered according to the passage? being more rewarding than just playing against the computer. However, since video games usually display A) Is there a way to avoid the risk of addiction to video increasing levels of difficulty, they are continually games? challenging our skills, making the brain perform at 100% of its capacity, resulting in effective cognitive training. B) Is there any research on the effects of video games on Video games also contribute to the proper functioning of the brain? the brain, and can even improve it. C)Can video games help people socialise with others? D)Can video games better brain functioning? E) Are there any disadvantages associated with video games? 43. There is a controversy about video games even among scientists because ----. A) not many scientists have developed the suitable research design to investigate the issue B) video games affect our brains in a number of ways 46. What is the author’s attitude towards video games? C)scientists are still waiting for convincing findings from clinical testing A)Sarcastic B)Indifferent C)Sceptical D)different studies have produced contradictory findings D)Objective E)Pessimistic E) there are not many changes in the brains of video game players 12 2018-YDS Fall/English 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. According to the passage, in order to estimate crop production losses, the new research ----. A) analysed alternate models using Obama’s Clean Nearly 20 US states have started to implement former Power Plan as a point of reference president Barack Obama’s Clean Power Plan, which places limits on carbon dioxide emissions from power B) relied upon asthma and premature death statistics plants in an effort to reduce the impacts of climate change. The plan has been in legal limbo for the past C)targeted all crops including corn, cotton, potatoes, and year, yet scientists have now calculated another soybeans outcome of the policy: harm to crop yields if the plan is stopped. Along with carbon pollution, coal-fired power D)adopted models that were different from the Clean plants spew pollutants that form smog, which was Power Plan already known to contribute to increased rates of asthma and premature deaths. The new research E) excluded models based on policies in place before the estimates the extent to which smog, under air-pollution Clean Power Plan policies in place before the Clean Power Plan, would limit production in 2020 of four major crops: corn, cotton, potatoes, and soybeans. Led by environmental engineer Shannon Capps, the research team also estimated the extent to which those crop production losses would shrink under three nationwide counter scenarios. One improved the efficiency of individual power plants. 49. What is the main idea of the passage? Another modelled a policy similar to the Obama plan, A) There is no difference between the Obama plan and setting state carbon dioxideemission goals for the other similar plans in terms of reducing emissions. electricity sector. And the third established a tax on carbon emissions, under which emissions decreased B) Crop production will continue to shrink under all three the most. But the greatest drop in smog-forming plans proposed by the researchers. pollutants – and the greatest gains in crop yields – came from policies such as the Clean Power Plan. C)Reducing carbon dioxide emissions from power plants will not necessarily increase crop production. D)Policies like the Clean Power Plan are needed to reduce smog rates and increase crop yields. 47. Which of the following is true about crop production E) Improving the efficiency of power plants is necessary according to the passage? to control crop production losses. A) The losses are insignificant since only four crops are affected. B) Smog has no significant effect on crop production in the US. C)If coal-fired power plant efficiency is improved, crop 50. Which of the following would be the best title for the yields will increase dramatically. passage? A) The Importance of the Clean Power Plan D)Coal-fired power plants produce smog, thereby negatively impacting crop yields. B) Three Plans for Crop Production E) The losses will continue at the same pace even after C)Pollution from Power Plants implementing the Clean Power Plan. D)Smog: How Harmful Can It Be? E) Why is the Obama Plan in Legal Limbo? 13 2018-YDS Fall/English 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. According to the passage, Jeffrey Davies ----. A) ended up working on the neurogenesis process by chance when he was working on Parkinson’s disease Fasting could boost your brainpower. A stomach B) discovered that ghrelin contributes to neurogenesis, hormone that stimulates appetite seems to promote the which might be the reason why it improves memory growth of new brain cells and protect them from the effects of ageing ─ and may explain why some people C)presented his study at the British Neuroscience say that fasting makes them feel sharper. Ghrelin is Association conference in order to increase known as the hunger hormone, as it is made by the awareness of Parkinson’s disease stomach when it gets empty. If we go a few hours without food, its levels rise in our blood. But there is also D)thinks that more research on ghrelin is needed in evidence that ghrelin can enhance cognition. Animals order to understand its effects on Parkinson’s disease fed reduced-calorie diets have better mental abilities. Injecting ghrelin into mice improves their performance in E) believes that ghrelin affects memory in mice differently learning and memory tests, and seems to boost the from humans number of connections in their brains. Now Jeffrey Davies at Swansea University, UK, and his team have found further evidence that ghrelin can stimulate brain cells to divide and multiply, a process called neurogenesis. When they added the hormone to mouse brain cells grown in a dish, it switched on a gene known to trigger neurogenesis. ‘’If the same happens in animals, this could be how ghrelin affects memory,’’ says Davies, whose work was presented at the British 53. The underlined phrase in the passage ‘switched on’ Neuroscience Association conference in 2017. The work is closest in meaning to ----. may have implications for treating neurodegenerative conditions. Davies’s team have found that ghrelin, or A)protected B)covered chemicals that act the same way, could help treat some conditions like Parkinson’s disease. C)maintained D)transferred E)activated 51. According to the passage, the hormone ghrelin ----. A) is called the hunger hormone because it prevents one from feeling hungry for long hours 54. What is the primary purpose of the author? B) is produced by the body in higher amounts when there A) To describe how the neurogenesis process takes are more brain cell connections in the brain place in human brain C)slows down the neurogenesis process when produced B) To highlight that the brain can gain substantial benefits in considerably low amounts from increased levels of ghrelin D)plays a role in a number of functions from the C)To discuss whether ghrelin could be used as a production of new brain cells to enhanced mental treatment for Parkinson’s disease abilities D)To emphasise the importance of Davies’s study on E) affects our appetite in a negative way and causes us mice and their mental abilities to consume more food than we actually need E) To draw particular attention to the 2017 conference held by the British Neuroscience Association 14 2018-YDS Fall/English 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. What could be concluded from the passage about first impressions? A) First impressions about people hardly ever change, First impressions can affect your life course – how you positively or negatively, even with lots of effort. manage job interviews, whether you gain friends at social gatherings, etc. A study by Harvard psychologist B) We do not have any control over our first impressions Mahzarin Banaji showed that first impressions can strike and cannot change them later. us even after we think we have abandoned them. Still, however quickly and unintentionally these impressions C)The effects of positive first impressions last much form themselves in us, we are not mindless robots. longer than those of negative first impressions. “People have some flexibility,” says psychologist Melissa Ferguson from Cornell University, who is D)People may sometimes act like mindless robots when interested in how people form, and change, their it comes to first impressions. impressions of others. She has a guy named Bob E) We can change our first impressions of others later to thank for her findings. For her studies, Ferguson although they are formed unintentionally. introduces test subjects to a fictional character named Bob. Sometimes Bob is portrayed as good, with a list of a hundred nice behaviours. When subjects find out he is convicted of an immoral act involving a child, the good impression of Bob completely flips. Other times, Bob does a hundred things making study subjects see him as a moderately nasty guy. Then it is revealed that Bob donated a kidney to a stranger. Here too, Ferguson's 57. What can be concluded from the study conducted subjects adjusted their opinion; they thought better of by Ferguson? him, but still did not think well of him. “They did not flip,” A) Positive information changes the negative first she says. “A single piece of extremely negative impressions of people to a great extent even though information undoes a positive first impression, but it it is about something trivial. does not work the same way in the opposite direction. It takes more to overcome a negative first impression.” B) Positive first impressions about someone are more likely to turn into negative opinions when a bit of negative information is provided. C)Negative first impressions are more likely to change quickly and easily than positive first impressions. 55. It is understood from the passage that first D)When nasty people do something really good, people impressions ----. adopt a positive attitude towards them, ignoring their A) do not shape our lives profoundly when formed quickly unpleasant background. and unintentionally E) People tend to have positive first impressions about B) might not be as easy to get rid of as we may think others most of the time, but later they may change their mind. C)may be misleading in job interviews or at social gatherings D)lose their effectiveness after a certain amount of time has passed E) have such a strong impact on our lives that it is 58. Which could be the best title for this passage? impossible to change them A) The Lack of Control over First Impressions B) How to Ward Off Negative First Impressions C)Different Perspectives on First Impressions D)Constructing and Adjusting First Impressions E) Forming Reliable First Impressions 15 2018-YDS Fall/English 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. It can be understood from the passage that Spanish and Portuguese explorers ----. A) were initially very open to providing Piri Reis with Dating from 1513, a map drawn by Turkish mariner Piri information Reis is one of the earliest cartographic depictions of the Americas. Historians have long been fascinated by B) wanted to ensure that no others could find their way to many aspects of his map, such as its level of accuracy. the Americas The route to the New World, the Americas, was at first a secret closely guarded by the Spanish and Portuguese C)were the only ones exploring the Atlantic navigators who were exploring the Atlantic – for example, Christopher Columbus, who was working for D)were in direct competition with Christopher Columbus the Spanish monarchy. Reis surprisingly placed the New World on the correct longitudinal meridian in relation to E) worked very closely with monarchies to establish the the African continent. His was the earliest known map to New World do so. However, similar to other maps of the time, the scale of this map is inconsistent, with the Americas drawn much larger than Africa or Asia. Piri Reis wrote on the map itself that he had consulted other maps in Arabic, including some classical sources. He also referred to four contemporary Portuguese maps, as well as one by Columbus. The mystery remains, however, as 61. The most surprising aspect of Piri Reis’s map is that to how Piri Reis gained access to Columbus’s ----. discoveries. A) it was the most complete map of the time B) the scale was consistent with the previous ones C)the locations of Africa and Asia were correctly noted 59. It can be understood from the passage that Piri Reis’s map ----. D)his placement of the New World was accurate A) was the first one to include depictions of the Americas E) it was the first to include longitudinal meridians B) was preceded by others that include Africa C)was not the only map showing the Americas D)is the first example of a marine map 62. Which of the following is true about Piri Reis and his E) is more accurate than once believed map? A) The Americas appeared much larger than Africa and Asia on Piri Reis's map because he basically relied upon Arabic maps. B) It was impossible that he could have had the same knowledge as Christopher Columbus. C)There is some doubt about how Piri Reis made use of the discoveries of previous explorers and their maps. D)Due to the similarity in scale inconsistencies, it is often considered that Piri Reis essentially copied his classical sources. E) How Piri Reis managed to learn about the discoveries of Columbus is still unknown today. 16 2018-YDS Fall/English 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Journalist: option to complete the dialogue.  So, your company has set up a system that offers online clinical-counselling, and you’re the chief operating officer. Do you think e-therapy is more 63. Robert: effective for certain people?  You've persuaded me to volunteer for that organ donation team, but I can’t figure out what exactly Psychologist: we’re supposed to do.  Of course, for any therapy to be effective, it has to meet the individual needs of patients. E-therapy Lee: may appeal to people looking for convenience,  The team is trying to encourage families to flexibility and privacy, in particular. College consider how they would feel about donation if students and workers with not much time usually they needed an organ transplant when not enough opt for our online services. people give their consent. Journalist: Robert:  ----  ---- Psychologist: Lee:  People have a tendency to think that because  Exactly. Surveys show that 30% of people have you’re using an online service, it must be never discussed organ donation with their impersonal and can’t have the same effect. friends and relatives. But it’s not true. The difference in results between A) So, as far as I understand, the team is basically trying e-therapy and a face-to-face one is quite minimal. to raise people’s awareness about the issue. A) How do you talk tech-challenged people into e-therapy? B) I see. People are aware of the importance of organ transplantation but most are unwilling to be donors. B) Why do you think e-therapy will overtake face-to-face therapy? C)OK, so non-profit organisations try to ensure that the ethical considerations are understood. C)What is the biggest myth about e-therapy? D)Yeah, everybody knows that organ transplantation is D)How does an e-therapy session work? a must for those who desperately need organs. E) How does e-therapy help people with a serious mental E) I think more and more people are now well-informed illness? about the challenges of the procedure. 17 2018-YDS Fall/English 65. Richard: 66. Sarah:  I saw a video the other day on the Internet about a  Recently, I’ve read a magazine article, and it says polyglot. over the first four years of marriage, spouses report a gradual increase in their willingness to Lucy: forgive each other.  A polyglot? What’s that? Francis: Richard:  So, it means they learn to forgive each other as  A polyglot is a person who speaks several they spend more time together. different languages. The person in the video I saw speaks eight languages including Portuguese and Sarah: Chinese.  ---- Lucy: Francis:  ----  What do you mean? Richard: Sarah:  There are some methods used. For example,  The article says forgiving benefits both partners allocating a few hours a day for a language until only if the forgiven partner is agreeable and mastering it, including intense listening and cooperative. If not, he or she tends to offend speaking activities. again. A) Why aren’t there more people who can speak many A) I think anyone who is in a close relationship will, at languages like this? some point, have to decide whether or not to forgive. B) What’s the minimum number of languages needed to B) Well, I believe the most important thing in relations is describe someone as a polyglot? mutual trust. If you have it, you don’t experience such forgiveness problems. C)Do you think he’s completely fluent in all eight of those languages? C)It’s also possible that even if someone wants to forgive, they might not think that the wrongdoer or D)How do you think such people manage to learn so offender really deserves it. many languages? D)One needs to be cautious, though, as forgiveness could backfire, depending on the offending partner’s E) How many more languages do you think he can add to personality. his repertoire? E) Maybe the reason is that being exposed to situations where forgiveness is required helps one improve that skill. 18 2018-YDS Fall/English 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Stacy: rephrased form of the given sentence.  I’m so bored with my never-ending to-do list. But I can’t say I’ve been able to cross a single item off the list so far. 68. Mentally healthy adults have a right to refuse Carole: medical intervention even if this is likely to result in  Maybe you should stop procrastinating and just fatal consequences. start working on your list. A) No matter how deadly the results of medical intervention are, mentally healthy adults are choosing Stacy: to reject it.  What do you mean? B) If they are mentally healthy, adults could reject Carole: medical intervention without considering whether or  ---- not such an intervention could lead to some tragic outcomes. Stacy:  I think you’re right, finding another person with C)Regardless of possible deadly results of rejecting the same aspirations will help me take action. medical intervention, adults who are mentally healthy have an entitlement to do it. A) I don’t get why you’ve been feeling so desperate about your life plans. You’re one of the most ambitious and D)It is a right for mentally healthy adults to oppose motivated people I know. medical intervention even though they may be aware of possible deadly results. B) Well, I’ve been seeing a psychologist to deal with the same type of issue. Maybe that’s something you can E) It is possible for mentally healthy adults to consider look into as well. refusing medical intervention when they are aware of serious implications of this. C)Life seems to be getting busier for us modern working women. Maybe keeping a diary of goals you’ve achieved will help you stay focused. D)Maybe one way to deal with your problem is just making a habit out of it. I mean you should make a habit of taking action to fulfil your plans. E) You don’t have to keep waiting for the perfect moment. Plus sharing your goals and plans with someone else could be a good idea. 19 2018-YDS Fall/English 69. While some people believe that video games are a 70. Since December 2014, the Breathe Project in the waste of time, certain games can be a good vehicle US has been making use of high definition cameras for training specific skills, such as enhancing that let residents monitor the air pollution in their short-term memory, agility or reaction time. cities online. A) Although some people are convinced that video A) US residents have been contributing to the Breathe games are useful in teaching specific skills like Project since December 2014 by monitoring the air improving short-term memory, agility or reaction time, pollution in their cities with online use of high definition some of them are futile activities, according to some cameras. others. B) In the US, air pollution has been monitored online by B) Certain video games can be good means for the Breathe Project with high definition cameras since practising some specific skills like improving December 2014 in order to inform residents about the short-term memory, agility or reaction time, but there rates in their cities. are some people who believe that video games are of C)Residents can reduce air pollution in their cities by no use. using online high definition cameras of the Breathe Project, which was launched by the US in December C)Some people assume that video games are 2014. time-consuming, although they know that certain video games are efficient tools in teaching specific skills like D)High definition cameras used by the Breathe Project in improving short-term memory, agility or reaction time. the US since December 2014 help residents combat D)Video games are thought to be time-consuming; air pollution in their cities through online monitoring. however, they may be beneficial for some people E) High definition cameras that have been utilised by the practising certain skills like improving short-term Breathe Project in the US since December 2014 memory, agility or reaction time. enable residents to monitor the air pollution in their cities online. E) There are some people who presume that video games are beneficial in specific skills like improving short-term memory, agility or reaction time; however, those games could be a waste of time indeed. 20 2018-YDS Fall/English 72-75: For these questions, choose the best 71. The growing awareness of the impact of job stress option to complete the missing part of the is best illustrated by the sheer increase in the passage. volume of job stress research in recent years. A) The past few years have witnessed a dramatic rise in 72. According to a study in Usenge, Kenya, near the the amount of job stress research, which best town of Kisimu, most families in the village do not demonstrates the increasing recognition of the impact value formal Western schooling. There is no reason of job stress. they should, as their children will for the most part B) The influence of job stress has increased recently, spend their lives farming or engaged in other which is best shown by the awareness that has been occupations that make little or no use of Western substantially enhanced by the growth in the amount schooling. These families emphasise teaching their of job stress research. children the indigenous, informal knowledge that will lead to successful adaptation in the C)People are becoming increasingly aware of the environments in which they will really live. ---- They volume of job stress research, which has been best hope that their children may be able to leave the illustrated by the recent increase in the influence of job village and to go to a university. These families tend stress. to emphasise the value of Western education and to devalue indigenous informal knowledge. Thus, the D)Lately, there has been more research in the field of job families typically value and emphasise one or the stress, which means that it may lead to a higher level of consciousness about the influence of job stress. other kind of knowledge, but not both. A) At the same time, there are some, perhaps not many, E) Although there has been a considerable increase in families in the village that have different expectations the number of studies on job stress recently, there is for their children. still a need for greater understanding of the influence of job stress. B) They believe that investing a lot of time in the development of academic skills needed for school success is a poor investment. C)Furthermore, they see the learning of informal knowledge as relevant to their everyday adaptation as a better use of their time. D)Some wealthy and educated parents living in the village share the same opinion with such families and do not favour formal Western schooling. E) In formal Western schooling, however, children typically study a variety of subjects, including maths, foreign languages, etc., from an early age. 21 2018-YDS Fall/English 73. As children move into adolesence, they seek much 74. Medieval Islam became the principal heir to ancient more autonomy. At this stage, parents must achieve Greek science, and Islamic civilisation remained the a delicate balance between granting autonomy and world leader in virtually every field of science making sure their children do not get into situations between 800-1300 AD. The sheer level of scientific where problematic or even dangerous behaviour activity underlines this point, as the number of could occur. ---- This makes it likely that their Islamic scientists during the four centuries after the children will be involved with other teens who are Prophet matched the number of Greek scientists enthusiastic about school and not into risk-taking. during the four centuries following Thales. Islamic scientists established the first truly international A) However, some parents may find it difficult to develop clear rules to ensure the teenager engages in scientific community, stretching from Iberia to appropriate activities when not under adult Central Asia. ---- A moment’s thought, however, supervision. shows how unreasonable it is to evaluate the history of Islamic science only or even largely as a link to B) It could be helpul if parents establish effective European science, or even to subsume Islamic communication with their children with regard to what science into the ‘Western tradition’. Medieval Islam they are doing each day and foster their academic and its science must be judged on their own terms, interests. and those terms are as much Eastern as Western. A) Early Islamic rulers encouraged the mastery of foreign C)Children who are not regularly monitored by their cultural traditions, including notably Greek philosophy parents are more likely to adopt destructive habits, and science. suffer from depression, and obtain poor grades. B) Yet, medieval Islamic science is sometimes dismissed D)The most important issues to consider are the time as a conduit passively transmitting ancient Greek teens need to be home, where they can go when they science to the European Middle Ages. are out, and whom they can be with. C)Islam was and is based on literacy and the holy book E) On the contrary, offering numerous opportunities for of the Quran, and contrary to the popular view, Islam young people to play a greater role in civic life and showed itself tolerant toward others. governance is another way to prevent problems. D)The result was another hybrid society, the cultural ‘Hellenisation’ of Islam and its typically bureaucratised institutions. E) The institutional aspects of Islamic science are only beginning to be studied with scholarly rigour, and nothing like a full historical survey exists for the Islamic case. 22 2018-YDS Fall/English 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 75. Even though there are a number of teaching sentence in the passage. approaches, the literature indicates that teachers have two primary orientations to teaching: an orientation toward conveying knowledge and an orientation toward facilitating learning. ---- On the 76. (I) In ancient time-measurement systems, including other hand, if the teacher wants to maximise those of both Egypt and China, daylight and night-time students’ understanding, he or she will probably were each given 12 hours. (II) This was convenient for use with sundials, which are known from Egypt as early focus on the integration and elaboration of as 1500 BC, although telling the time 'by the Sun' information in ways that could facilitate meaningful probably predates the first humans. (III) However, learning and critical thinking. because the length of daylight and night-time varies with A) Interestingly, teachers’ approaches to teaching are the season, so did the length of the sundials. (IV) When also mediated by situational and contextual factors in water clocks came into use, shortly after them, a conflict addition to a number of other factors. between the two forms of measurement became apparent. (V) In the 8th century AD, the Chinese began B) Hence, the various characteristics of students in these to add primitive but a bit more sophisticated equipment classrooms will influence the approach to teaching as to water clocks. well as its outcomes. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V C)For example, a teacher whose goal of teaching is to transmit and increase knowledge will likely focus on the content and provide structured learning experiences. D)Moreover, it is generally known that the values and beliefs of teachers influence their perceptions and judgements and also affect their behaviour in the classroom. 77. (I) Early world history focuses on agricultural civilisations, but it must also pay attention to regions that E) Furthermore, this teacher might believe that students developed different kinds of economies and different should be rewarded for good work and penalised for organisational structures. (II)The development of lack of effort and poor work. agriculture was a radical change in humans' way of life.(III) By providing a dependable source of food, it allowed people to live in larger groups. (IV)Later on, toolmaking technology advanced with the discovery of metalworking, which in turn further increased agricultural production.(V) Increased production freed some members of the society to perform other kinds of work and this in turn encouraged a further series of organisational changes we call civilisation. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 23 2018-YDS Fall/English 78. (I)Most non-marine food chains depend on insects. 80. (I)Martin Luther King Jr. was born in 1929 and grew up (II) Almost all birds eat insects, and even those that eat in the Deep South, a region of America with a history seeds as adults still feed insects to their young. scarred by slavery and racial segregation. (II) An (III) If there were no longer any insects, we would not intelligent and deeply religious man, he attended college need the 430,000 tonnes of insecticides that are at the early age of 15 and went on to study theology, sprayed onto crops every year. (IV) Insects also break receiving his doctorate in 1955. (III) King was inspired by down plant matter and help recycle nutrients into the early civil right leaders, such as Howard Thurman, who soil. (V) Without any insects at all, most bird and knew his father and was a trusted mentor. (IV)In 1963, amphibian species would be extinct in two months. King led the ‘March on Washington’, a huge event where thousands gathered on the National Mall to hear A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V him speak. (V) He also looked up to Mahatma Gandhi, and was to adopt his teachings of non-violent resistance in his own struggle for equality in the US. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 79. (I) In its earlier days, people treated the experience of watching television rather like that of the cinema, but in many ways, television is nothing like cinema. (II)While film is designed to be a public event and its characteristic mode is a complete performance, television is a procession of segments arranged as a series and watched privately or domestically. (III) Communal watching of programmes provides opportunities for displays of family warmth and affection, so television watching may promote strong emotional connections among families and friends. (IV)Contrary to the intense quality of film that receives sustained attention from the audience, television watching is more casual and episodic. (V)Another obvious distinction is that films typically start with a disordered narrative and move through a series of ups and downs to a resolution, but television presents itself as a set of repeated segments which do not always form a unity of any kind. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 24 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS. 2018 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ) 2018 - YDS SONBAHAR 09-09-2018 1. D 48. A 2. D 49. D 3. A 50. A 4. B 51. D 5. D 52. B 6. B 53. E 7. C 54. B 8. E 55. B 9. E 56. E 10. B 57. B 11. D 58. D 12. C 59. C 13. E 60. B 14. B 61. D 15. C 62. E 16. C 63. A 17. E 64. C 18. A 65. D 19. D 66. D 20. E 67. E 21. B 68. C 22. B 69. B 23. D 70. E 24. A 71. A 25. B 72. A 26. E 73. B 27. B 74. B 28. D 75. C 29. C 76. E 30. A 77. A 31. D 78. C 32. C 79. C 33. D 80. D 34. C 35. C 36. D 37. D 38. C 39. C 40. E 41. D 42. C 43. D 44. D 45. A 46. D 47. D T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS/1) İNGİLİZCE 24 MART 2019 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. 2019-YDS/1/English This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 3. Although empirical studies into the brain’s left and expression to fill the space. right hemispheric participation in language acquisition are ---- and differ from each other, some observational studies indicate that adults 1. Like the rest of the animal kingdom, mammals need might benefit from right-brain-oriented activities in food for energy and the ---- of bodily processes such the foreign language classroom. as growth and reproduction. A)unavailable B)indispensible A)suspension B)deterioration C)indestructible D)inconclusive C)maintenance D)elaboration E)unprecedented E)persistence 4. The foundations of international law as it is 2. With rapid advancements in technology, there understood today lie ---- in the development of are new ----, already seen in countries such as Western culture and political organisation. Myanmar and Sri Lanka where social media apps A)eligibly B)instantly have been instrumental in spreading fake news and violence. C)adequately D)firmly A)measures B)adjustments E)convertibly C)incentives D)threats E)obligations 5. There is a link between sunlight and the chemical serotonin, which ---- our mood and is important in reducing anxiety disorders. A)initiates B)detects C)reveals D)hinders E)boosts 2019-YDS/1/English 6. Parkinson’s disease is a movement disorder that 8. As two-thirds of homes in the US owned radio ---- the death of neurons producing dopamine, a receivers by the end of the 1920s, people no longer neurochemical that dispatches messages to parts of ---- to a concert, play, or sporting event to be the brain that control motor skills and coordination. entertained; instead, they ---- many forms of entertainment from the comfort of their homes. A)takes over B)stems from A) should have gone / must have enjoyed C)makes up D)pins down B) may go / were able to enjoy E)gets through C)used to go / may have enjoyed D)had to go / could enjoy E) would go / ought to have enjoyed 7-16: For these questions, choose the best word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). 7. In its early stage of development, ecotourism ---- as a completely new concept; however, today, it ---- a 9. Humanity’s extraordinary success ---- due to our significant portion of the tourism industry in ingenuity in devising cultural means ---- our physical general. limitations. A) was going to be regarded / is becoming A) has been / to overcome B) had been regarded / will become B) was / having overcome C)was being regarded / is going to become C)had been / overcoming D)was regarded / has become D)is / overcome E) has been regarded / becomes E) will be / to have overcome 10. The geographical spread of English is unique ---- the languages of the world, and it is an official language in about 50 countries, where it is used in addition to the indigenous first languages ---- a variety of public and personal functions. A)from / at B)to / on C)through / with D)among / for E)about / in 2019-YDS/1/English 11. Weather is defined as the state of the atmosphere 14. To psychology professionals, the name Anne ---- a given location and ---- a relatively short period Anastasi is synonymous with psychometrics, ---- it of time. was she who pioneered understanding how psychological traits are influenced, developed, and A)along / on B)towards / in measured. C)at / over D)from / against A)so B)even if E)for / about C)while D)yet E)as 12. Renaissance art evolved from a common set of principles, ---- it took many directions and changed considerably in the following centuries. 15. Music is a very small word to encompass something A)instead B)provided that that takes ---- many forms ---- there are cultural and subcultural identities. C)but D)for A)either / or B)both / and E)so C)as / as D)such / that E)not only / but also 13. ---- palaeontologists still like to argue about what role the asteroid played in the dinosaur extinction, there really is not much of a mystery left. 16. Although genetically modified seed is more A)Once B)In case expensive than conventional equivalents, the extra cost can be seen as an insurance policy against C)Given that D)Although crop losses ---- weeds or pests. A)contrary to B)due to E)As C)in terms of D)despite E)along with 2019-YDS/1/English 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19. passage. A)even so B)thus Today the deadly poliomyelitis virus is only endemic to C)conversely D)instead four countries – Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and Pakistan. This is (17)---- the groundbreaking research E)otherwise undertaken by doctor and biologist Jonas Salk. In 1947, at the University of Pittsburgh, Salk combined his work on the influenza vaccine with his search for a vaccine to protect (18)----poliomyelitis. The virus was deadly in 5 to 10 percent of cases where patients became paralysed, and (19)---- were unable to breathe. Medical opinion at the time held that only a live virus (20)---- total immunity, but Salk disproved this. In 1952 he used formaldehyde, a gas with a strong smell, to inactivate the poliomyelitis virus and developed a vaccine still capable of triggering 20. an immune response in a host. Initially tested on monkeys, then human patients, Salk’s success (21)---- A)had to prompt B)would have prompted him to test it on himself, his family, his staff, and other volunteers. C)must have prompted D)should have prompted E)could prompt 17. A)rather than B)such as C)thanks to D)except for 21. E)along with A)oppressed B)neglected C)prohibited D)convinced E)deterred 18. A)on B)with C)for D)over E)against 2019-YDS/1/English 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)have developed B)were developing The snake is one of the most emblematic creatures in C)had developed D)would develop human mythology, and is perceived to represent both wisdom and evil. Indian mythology considers snakes to E)are developing be the ‘bringers of life’, (22)---- the Bible tells the story of a snake as the first deceiver. Snakes’ most (23)---- characteristic is their lack of limbs, so they move with a slithering motion. As they hunt other animals, they (24)---- a keen sense of smell and the ability to sense vibrations and temperature variations. To kill their prey, venomous snakes use their long and sharp teeth to inject a paralysing or deadly nerve venom (25)---- their specialised salivary glands, where the venom is stored. They can unhinge their jaws to swallow large prey. 25. (26)---- growing continuously, snakes shed their skin by detaching the outermost layer. A)for B)over C)from D)on E)to 22. A)once B)while C)otherwise D)because E)therefore 26. A)Except for B)Similar to C)With the help of D)In spite of E)As a result of 23. A)sceptical B)tolerable C)variable D)prominent E)misleading 2019-YDS/1/English 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. ----, the diseases which were also brought posed option to complete the given sentence. serious challenges to their way of life. A) Given that the Native Americans were initially hospitable to the European settlers 27. Even though some studies suggest that exposure to the blue light emitted by digital devices could be a B) Although the Native Americans benefited from access risk factor for developing certain eye conditions, ----. to new technology and trade came with the early A) it has also been revealed that long hours of screen European settlers time may trigger headaches C)Since the Native Americans had customs and culture B) most parents worry that digital devices can ruin their which were totally different from those of the European immigrants children’s eyesight D)Because the Native Americans were aware of the C)many scientists think that the evidence to support this early settlers’ thirst for land and wealth claim is not very strong E) Even though the Native Americans and European D)there are other eye issues that our screens can bring immigrants had difficulties in communication due to on, such as dry or tired eyes language problems E) some companies are marketing special glasses that protect our eyes from the blue light 30. Although many people equate creativity with intelligence, ----. 28. While Willis Carrier, who was among the most A) creativity is a critical aspect of a person’s life, starting relentless researchers and promoters of air from inside the womb onward through adulthood conditioning, is known as the father of air B) a child’s creativity can be either strongly encouraged conditioning, ----. or discouraged by early experiences at home A) the range of processes and products involved in air conditioning cannot be attributed to a single person C)the two terms are not synonymous, and it is not necessary to have a genius-level IQ to be creative B) for centuries, ice and water had been manipulated to cool air circulating in theatres, hospitals, and factories D)standard intelligence tests measure convergent thinking, which is the ability to come up with a single C)air conditioning began to be marketed as a comfort correct answer device for domestic consumption during the 1930s E) creative individuals tend to share certain D)the development of industrial air conditioning characteristics, including a tendency to be more dominated the newly created industry at the beginning impulsive or spontaneous of the 20th century E) technologies were being developed in the refrigeration industry contemporaneously with Carrier’s work in humidification 2019-YDS/1/English 31. Since virtually all cultures on earth have some form 33. The literature on treatment for learning disabilities of fortune-telling, ----. primarily discusses school-based treatments, ----. A) most people are no longer curious about what their A) though individuals with learning disabilities experience future will bring to them challenges beyond such settings B) it is an incomprehensible temptation to get information B) because such endeavours do not guarantee that a about what awaits us in the future specific treatment will be effective C)it would be somewhat undesirable for a person to C)so treatments without widespread research support know what is ahead in the future may not turn out to be successful D)the desire to predict what will happen in the future can D)if we treat individuals with learning disabilities through be a permanent feature of the human mind methods they prefer E) it is considered to be a science by some, whereas E) while defining learning disabilities is as important as others claim that it is nothing more than speculation conducting research on treatments 32. Most people have experienced foodborne illness ----. 34. In our rapidly changing world, parents’ skills may A) given that those working in the field of food safety are easily become obsolete, ----. most concerned about microbial foodborne illness A) though children sometimes look to their peers rather than their parents for guidance and approval B) because ensuring the safety of food is a shared responsibility among producers, industry, government, B) as family-centred learning plays a key role in and consumers equipping children with social, cultural and moral values C)although current estimates of foodborne illness in the United States are 325,000 hospitalisations, and C)while they might have difficulty in transmitting their around 5,000 deaths per year accumulated knowledge to their children D)even though they might not recognise it as such, D)but their children’s taste in diet, music, clothes and instead blaming it on the stomach flu or a 24-hour bug entertainment can significantly differ from their own taste E) when a person consciously thinks about food safety before, during or after eating a meal E) so they could have fewer opportunities for direct influence over their children’s development 2019-YDS/1/English 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. Hydroelectricity plants pose several threats to the English, and the most accurate English translation environment ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) while flooding is an important indicator for the environmental impact they cause 37. The Morse code, which is a milestone in long-range B) even though the proliferation of mosquitoes may communication, was designed so that telegraph disturb those living close to them operators could communicate via electrical signals. A) Uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası olan Mors C)because they could lead to the extinction of endemic alfabesi, telgraf operatörlerinin elektrik sinyalleri species and block fish migration aracılığıyla iletişim kurabilmeleri için tasarlanmıştır. D)although the loss of historical and archaeological B) Uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası olsa da heritage is a big concern Mors alfabesi ilk olarak telgraf operatörlerinin elektrik sinyalleri yoluyla haberleşmeleri için tasarlanmıştır. E) so that they help communities harness water resources for energy generation C)Telgraf operatörlerinin elektrik sinyalleri aracılığıyla iletişim kurması için tasarlanması, Mors alfabesini uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası hâline getirmiştir. D)Elektrik sinyalleri aracılığıyla telgraf operatörlerinin iletişim kurması için tasarlanan Mors alfabesi, uzun mesafe iletişimin dönüm noktasıdır. 36. ----, they rely on each other for optimal performance, E) Uzun mesafe iletişimde bir dönüm noktası olan Mors which is a sign of concern for interdependence in alfabesinin tasarlanma sebebi, telgraf operatörlerinin groups. elektrik sinyalleriyle iletişim kurabilmelerini sağlamaktı. A) Since some individuals are not attracted to group activities B) Because it is possible for individuals to do something they find distasteful C)Whenever members of a group come together to do a variety of tasks D)Although group support depends on members’ willingness to take part E) Whereas there is mutual interest between group members within social settings 2019-YDS/1/English 38. Solving a series of incredibly difficult problems , the 39. Every child has an individual learning style, and they Wright brothers created a revolutionary new learn information best when it is delivered in a mode technology that changed the world in a way that suited to their style. even they could not imagine. A) Her çocuk kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekline sahiptir A) Wright kardeşler, kendilerinin bile hayal edemeyeceği ve çocuklar bilgiyi en iyi kendi tarzlarına uygun bir bir biçimde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim niteliğinde yeni biçimde verildiğinde öğrenir. bir teknoloji yaratarak inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi problemi çözmüşlerdir. B) Kendine özgü öğrenme şekliyle her çocuk, bilgiyi en iyi kendi tarzına uygun bir biçimde verildiğinde öğrenir. B) Wright kardeşler, inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi problemi çözmüşler ve kendilerinin bile hayal C)Kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekli olan her çocuk, edemeyeceği bir biçimde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim öğrenme tarzına uygun verildiği takdirde bilgiyi en iyi niteliğinde yeni bir teknoloji yaratmışlardır. şekilde öğrenir. C)Wright kardeşlerin inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi D)Her çocuk kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekline sahip problemi çözerek dünyayı değiştiren, devrim olduğu için bilgiyi en iyi kendi tarzına uygun bir niteliğinde yeni bir teknoloji yaratmaları, kendilerinin biçimde verildiğinde öğrenir. bile hayal edemeyeceği bir şeydi. E) Her çocuk kendine özgü bir öğrenme şekline sahiptir D)Wright kardeşler, inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi ve onlar için bilgiyi öğrenmenin en iyi yolu, kendi problemi çözerek kendilerinin bile hayal edemeyeceği tarzlarına uygun olanıdır. bir şekilde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim niteliğinde yeni bir teknoloji yaratmışlardır. E) Wright kardeşlerin kendilerinin bile hayal edemeyeceği bir biçimde dünyayı değiştiren, devrim niteliğinde yeni bir teknoloji yaratmak için yaptıkları şey, inanılmaz derecede zor bir dizi problemi çözmekti. 2019-YDS/1/English 40. Gen terapisi çoğunlukla ender genetik bozuklukların 41. Sağlık okuryazarlığı, bireylerin sağlık konusunda tedavisinde faydalıdır; bunun aksine, mevcut uygun kararlar vermek için gerekli olan temel sağlık genlerin değiştirilmesini kapsayan gen düzeltme, bilgi ve hizmetlerini elde etme ve anlama çok daha fazla hastalığı tedavi eder. kapasitesine sahip olma derecesi olarak tanımlanabilir. A) Gene therapy is mainly useful for treating rare genetic disorders, whereas gene-editing involves altering A) Health literacy can be defined as the degree to which existing genes and treating a wider range of individuals have the capacity to obtain and understand conditions. basic health information and services, and to make necessary health decisions in an appropriate way. B) Gene therapy mainly treats rare genetic disorders; gene-editing, on the other hand, involves the alteration B) Health literacy, which is required to make appropriate of the existing genes, which is useful for treating a health decisions, can be defined as the degree to wider range of conditions. which individuals have the capacity to obtain and understand basic health information and services. C) Gene therapy is mainly useful for treating rare genetic disorders; in contrast, gene-editing, which involves C)Defined as the degree to which individuals have the altering existing genes, treats a much wider range of capacity to obtain and understand basic health conditions. information and services, health literacy is necessary to make appropriate health decisions. D)Gene therapy is mainly used for the treatment of rare genetic disorders, but gene-editing can treat a much D)Health literacy can be defined as the degree to which wider range of disorders since it involves altering individuals have the capacity to obtain and understand existing genes. basic health information and services required to make appropriate health decisions. E) Gene therapy is mainly used to treat rare genetic disorders while gene-editing, which is the alteration of E) The degree to which individuals have the capacity to the existing genes, is involved in the treatment of a obtain and understand basic health information and wider range of conditions. services needed to make health decisions appropriately can be defined as health literacy. 2019-YDS/1/English 42. Tüm vücut fonksiyonlarımızı senkronize eden iç saatimiz, ipuçlarını güneş ışığının gündüz-gece döngüsünden alır ve beyin bu 24 saatlik ritmi organlarımıza iletmek ve vücudumuza ne zaman uyumaya ve uyanmaya ihtiyaç duyduğunu bildirmek için sinirleri ve hormonları kullanır. A) Our internal clock keeps all our body functions in sync by taking its cues from the day-night cycle of sunlight, and the brain transmits this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs and tells our body when it needs to sleep and wake by using nerves and hormones. B) Our internal clock, which keeps all our body functions in sync, takes its cues from the day-night cycle of sunlight, and the brain uses nerves and hormones to transmit this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs and to tell our body when it needs to sleep and wake. C)Our internal clock, by which all our body functions are kept in sync, takes its cues from the day-night cycle of sunlight, and to transmit this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs, the brain uses nerves and hormones, telling our body when it needs to sleep and wake. D)All our body functions are kept in sync by our internal clock, which takes its cues from the day-night cycle of sunlight, and the brain uses nerves and hormones to transmit this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs and tells our body when to sleep and wake. E) It is our internal clock that keeps all our body functions in sync by taking cues from the day-night cycle of sunlight, and the brain uses nerves and hormones while transmitting this 24-hour rhythm to our internal organs, and tells our body when to sleep and wake. 2019-YDS/1/English 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. One can understand from the passage that our shortcuts ----. A) become less helpful in adulthood as we tend to ignore We are born to judge others by how they look: our them brains come hardwired with a specific face-processing area, and even shortly after birth, babies would rather B) are generally accompanied by careful assessments of look at a human face than anything else. Within their others first year, they become more discerning, and are more likely to attend to friendly-looking faces than those who C)produce more beneficial results than they did in look serious. By the time we reach adulthood, we prehistoric times develop a great number of stereotypes and become snap-judgement specialists, jumping to conclusions D)might be considered morally unacceptable although about a person’s character and status after seeing his or they can provide help in our social lives her face for just a tenth of a second. And we ignore E) are unreliable because each person can interpret such considered assessments of others in favour of simple traits as trustworthiness differently cognitive shortcuts. For example, we judge a baby-faced individual as more trustworthy, associate a chiselled jaw with dominance, or refer to a person with a big nose as a curious one. Unfair or unethical, it may be, but it makes good evolutionary sense. Ours is an ultra-social species, so being able to quickly assess whether someone is friend or foe and whether they have the power to help or hurt us is important survival 45. How does Todorov explain why our shortcuts information. But there is a problem. As psychologist sometimes do not provide help? Alexander Todorov of Princeton University points out, A) He states that our shortcuts lead us to make very more often than not, our first impressions are wrong; quick assessments of others, and therefore our first that is, relying on our shortcuts may not always produce impressions are usually wrong. good results. It is not clear why, but he suggests that we meet many more strangers than our prehistoric B) He believes that unlike our prehistoric ancestors, we ancestors would have, and this may play a role. do not live in a hazardous world, so we do not need to develop shortcuts to survive. C)He thinks that we encounter so many faces in our modern world that our shortcuts may not guide us accurately. 43. Which could be inferred from the passage about our D)He claims that we live in a more complex world, which face-based judgements? requires us to rely on detailed assessments rather A) Babies cannot make judgements concerning human than simple shortcuts. faces because they are not yet capable of discriminating between different faces. E) He puts forward that our shortcuts are mostly based on people’s facial characteristics, so they cannot B) We begin to make assumptions about a person’s provide precise information. character or status after we have seen his or her face several times. C)We are innately predisposed to form an idea about a person just by looking at his or her face. D)The face-processing area in our brains functions more effectively during infancy than it does in our adult years. E) Regardless of how they look, all human faces can attract babies’ attention within their first year. 2019-YDS/1/English 46. Which could be the best title for this passage? A) Learning Survival Information from Our Ancestors B) Major Drawbacks of Our Cognitive Shortcuts C)How to Reject Unethical Stereotypes D)Transferring Our Cognitive Shortcuts into Adulthood E) Our Strong Tendency to Stereotype People 2019-YDS/1/English 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. Which of the following can be inferred from the passage about the relationship between needs and purchases? Consumer psychology is the study of the behaviour of A) Advertisers should take into account what consumers consumers of goods and services regarding their buying need, irrespective of what they desire, in order to patterns and reactions to advertising and marketing. It persuade them to buy particular products. seeks to explain consumer behaviour in two basic ways: B) Consumers are overwhelmed by their inner voice what the consumer wants and what the consumer telling them to buy what they need rather than what needs. The logical explanation for fulfilling the needs is they want. a simple one. If a person lives in New York, that person needs a winter coat to survive the cold outside. But why C)Economic factors far outweigh psychological ones the person buys a particular style or colour depends on when it comes to purchases based on fundamental the more complex issues of why a particular choice is needs. made. The key to unlocking consumer psychology is understanding that desires rule over needs when it D)Although needs intervene in consumer purchase, they comes to consumer purchase. In our modern world fall short in accounting for the details of the choices where new food products and electronic gadgets consumers make. emerge daily, it is in the interest of psychologists, as well as those marketing the products, to understand the E) Advertisers should acknowledge that the battle relationship between financial and psychological factors between desires and needs usually ends in the victory that make people buy what they buy. In fact, consumer of the latter. psychology utilises more than simply psychology, because it also studies economics and culture. 49. It can be inferred from the passage that in order to 47. Which of the following does consumer psychology better understand consumer psychology, one deal with? should ----. A) What marketers can do to effectively reach out to A) consider that there are several factors at play when potential customers examining consumers’ buying habits B) The challenge experienced by psychologists to B) study financial factors rather than psychological ones understand consumer behaviour that play a key role in advertising a product C)How basic requirements and desires influence C)concentrate more on seemingly rational reasons rather consumer behaviour than superficial ones in buying decisions D)Whether certain goods and services chosen by D)pay special attention to the fact that advertisers often consumers satisfy them or not try to persuade people to buy what they actually do not need E) How to help consumers avoid the conflict of needs and desires when making a purchase E) realise that consumers often tend to buy what they need rather than what they desire 2019-YDS/1/English 50. What is the main purpose of the passage? A) To analyse people’s buying habits from an economic viewpoint B) To highlight the huge number of products consumers are offered C)To stress the significant effect of advertising on consumer psychology D)To describe the change in consumer psychology in the modern world E) To explain what consumer psychology does to understand consumer behaviour 2019-YDS/1/English 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. Which of the following is given as a feature of broomrape? A) It provides energy for many nearby plants thanks to its All plants can survive for short periods without light. roots that harness sunlight. Obviously, they need to be able to last through the night, but they can also cope with a longer darkness in B) It can photosynthesise only when it is connected to an emergency. If you leave a tent pitched on the same another plant. patch of lawn, the grass underneath turns yellow and spindly. This is an adaptation, called etiolation, which C)It cannot feed itself without attaching to a plant that focuses the plant’s remaining resources into growing as photosynthesises. far as possible to try and reach sunlight again. There D)It never depends on sunlight to harness energy thanks are also some plants that have lost the power of photosynthesis altogether. The genus Orobanche to its adaptation skill. (commonly known as ‘broomrape’) is an example. The E) All the nutrients it gets are used up by the host plant it plants have no chlorophyll and get all their nutrients by is attached to. parasitically attaching to the roots of nearby plants instead. Although broomrape does not harness sunlight itself, it is still indirectly reliant on the sun to provide energy to its host plant. Some other parasitic plants, called mycoheterotrophs, feed on fungi and these could theoretically survive in complete darkness for months or even years. But of course, those fungi in turn get their energy by digesting dead plants, and in a permanently 53. Which of the following is clearly stated about the dark world, this food source would eventually run out. survival mechanism of mycoheterotrophs? A) Their source of energy is limited to the amount of dead plants in their habitat. B) They mainly depend on direct and permanent sunlight to survive. 51. What can be understood about the adaptation process of plants? C)They physically attach to fungi to help them digest dead plants. A) They tend to use their remaining energy in an attempt to access sunlight. D)They are heavily exploited by parasitic plants such as fungi to harness energy. B) They are not really affected by permanent darkness due to etiolation. E) The longer their habitat is in darkness, the stronger their survival skill gets. C)Even short periods of darkness cause plants to lose their ability to adapt. D)Some plants such as grass are more adaptable to darkness than others. E) They adjust to complete darkness by using up all their energy, so they no longer need photosynthesis. 2019-YDS/1/English 54. What is the main idea of the passage? A) All plants need one another to store energy and produce food. B) Plants can adapt to darkness, but none of them can live forever without sunlight. C)The sun is the eternal source of energy for living beings on our planet. D)Nature has so many defects that it is difficult for us to make up for all of them. E) Darkness makes some plant species more susceptible to parasites. 2019-YDS/1/English 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. Which could be inferred from the passage? A) Throughout Europe, 359 plant species have been found to show the ptoms of Pierce’s disease. Some 150 years after the Great French Wine Blight, B) Although Pierce’s disease affects a lot of plants in European vines – climbing plants that produce grapes Europe, it only develops in vines in the Americas. – are under threat from a disease that originated in the Americas. A bacterium known as Xyllella fastidiosa C)California has been unable to cope with the insects causes Pierce’s disease, in which the plants’ transport that transmit X. fastidiosa, which has destroyed the vessels become blocked, cutting the supply of water wine industry. and nutrients to the leaves. California’s Department of Food and Agriculture spends about $40 million a year to D)The impact of X. fastidiosa is far-reaching when the control the leaf-hopping insects that carry the bacteria from plant to plant in that region. Without this variety of infected plant species is considered. expenditure, the annual cost to the wine industry could E) Southern Italy is known to be the place where Pierce’s be up to $250 million. The bacterium does not just hit disease appeared for the first time. vines – in the Americas, it also strikes citrus and coffee plants. Now X. fastidiosa has reached Europe, where it has earned another name – the ‘Ebola of olive trees’. In 2013, it was spotted in a few olive trees in southern Italy, and by 2015 had infected up to a million trees there with what has become known as olive quick decline syndrome. So far, 359 plant species in Europe have been identified as being vulnerable to X. 57. Which of the following conclusions could be drawn fastidiosa, including peaches, lavender and rosemary. from the passage? Some show no ptoms, acting as reservoirs for the A) Agricultural damage from Pierce’s disease peaks in bacteria. Others dry and die quickly. Short of controlling winter months across Europe. insect species that could spread the disease, no cure is yet known. Generally cold winters slow the spread of B) Why plant species die soon after they catch Pierce’s Pierce’s disease; however, as the planet warms, there is disease has not been revealed yet. every chance the disease’s ranges could increase. C)Most plant species infected with X. fastidiosa show typical ptoms of Pierce’s disease. D)High temperatures may increase the speed at which Pierce’s disease is spreading. 55. One can understand from the passage that Pierce’s disease ----. E) Plants with Pierce’s disease can be cured by A) originated in the Americas in 2013, killing many plant supplying adequate water and nutrients to their leaves. species B) has already devastated the wine industry both in the Americas and Europe C)causes the leaves of a plant to be deprived of necessary ingredients D)is spread by a bacterium that absorbs water and nutrients in the leaves of a plant E) has caused more damage in Europe than the Great French Wine Blight did 2019-YDS/1/English 58. What is the primary purpose of the author? A) To emphasise the great amount of money spent to protect the wine industry against Pierce’s disease B) To point out the serious danger Pierce’s disease poses to various plant species C)To explain why X. fastidiosa is called the ‘Ebola of olive trees’ in Europe D)To warn that insects carrying X. fastidiosa increase in number as the planet warms E) To draw attention to the fact that a cure to eradicate Pierce’s disease is to arrive shortly 2019-YDS/1/English 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. To find the world’s best 100-plus sportsperson, Lepers and his colleagues ----. A) checked whether a centenarian athlete was able to Do you think you are too old to do sport? Think again. break the world record in his or her discipline in the An analysis of the world’s oldest record-breakers has past named 104-year-old cyclist Robert Marchand as B) examined the most successful performances by champion. Romuald Lepers at the University of 100-plus athletes and compared them with each other Burgundy, in Dijon, France, and his colleagues have investigated how age affects athletic performance. C)looked at the differences between centenarians’ While looking at middle-aged athletes, the team began performances and those of the world record holders to wonder who the world’s best 100-plus sportsperson might be. They identified all the best performances by D)asked the world record holders in athletics, swimming centenarians in athletics, swimming and cycling. Then and cycling to lay out selection criteria they compared each athlete with the world record holder in their discipline. The centenarian athlete who showed E) compared the performances of centenarian athletes the smallest decline was Frenchman Robert Marchand. with those of the middle-aged athletes Cycling 26.93 kilometres in 1 hour, Marchand was only 50.6 percent slower than Bradley Wiggins’s 54.53 km record. The study has also shown that athletic ability can be maintained until 35 to 40, and after that, performance decreases by about 10 percent per decade. But Marchand’s ability has declined much more slowly. Lepers says that Marchand has extraordinary 61. It is clear from the passage that the decline in muscular and cardiorespiratory function for his age. His performance corresponds to an age-related decline of Marchand’s athletic ability ----. less than 8 percent per decade. Lepers suggests that A) has been far slower thanks to his exceptional physical these athletes are not only remarkable biological characteristics examples, but they could also be good role models for others to follow. “Take Canadian Ed Withlock,” he says. B) has been found to be by 8 to 10 percent per decade Withlock was the first person over 70 to run a marathon in less than 3 hours. He took up running in his 40s. “It’s C)has allowed him to be a great inspiration to the never too late to be active,” says Lepers. athletes under 40 D)has been less sharp than the decrease in Bradley Wiggins’s athletic ability E) has been occurring at a rapid pace due to his 59. What was the initial aim of the study conducted by weakening bodily functions Lepers and his colleagues? A) To show that old people can also display excellent performance in several sports B) To explain how world record holders in different sports achieved extraordianary success C)To find out when athletic performance begins to decline dramatically D)To study the relation between age and athletic performance in middle-aged sportspeople E) To discover what distinguishes Robert Marchand from other 100-plus sportspeople 2019-YDS/1/English 62. Why does Lepers put a special emphasis on Withlock’s performance? A) To suggest that 3 hours is not sufficient for a 70-plus athlete to run a marathon B) To show that marathons are races where we can see powerful athletes over 70 C)To stress that an athlete must be a record-breaker to gain worldwide recognition D)To prove that Withlock was a more successful sportsperson than Marchand E) To indicate that one could be a brilliant sportsperson at any age 2019-YDS/1/English 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Debby: option to complete the dialogue.  I was recently offered a job at a different firm with a higher salary. I feel as if I’m at a crossroads in my career. I’ll have to make a decision soon. 63. Johanna:  Today, our psychology professor talked about a Lucy: biological process called 'neuroplasticity'. He said  ---- that even the adult brain can grow new brain cells in response to new experiences. Debby:  I love my job and the team, but I feel the company Stan: is asking too much of me.  ---- Lucy: Johanna:  I think you’ll easily get used to working with a new  Yeah, he said the exact same thing. I’d never team. And this change will be to your advantage. thought of them as being beneficial at all. I used You know it’s much easier to set your limits at the to think they only cause aggressive behaviour and beginning. If you do so, I’m sure you'll manage addiction. your professional life more easily. A) What stops you from negotiating a better deal with Stan: your current employer?  Well, apparently some scientists still have those fears, but it all depends on how effectively you B) Until now you seemed really happy with your current use them. job. What’s the problem? A) Such as playing action video games? I remember reading that they help the brain and improve cognitive C)I know it’s quite challenging. What’s attractive about skills. the new offer? B) That's really interesting. I’ve always thought that the D)You’ve always dreamed of working in a big company. human brain couldn’t grow new cells after a certain Why would you let yourself miss such an opportunity? age. E) Do you think you’ve practised building appropriate C)Did he say what kind of experiences? I’ve been boundaries in your professional life? playing chess for years hoping that it’ll give me a cognitive advantage at school. D)I’ve seen scientists trying it with patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease to prevent them from losing cognitive skills. E) But, don’t forget that outdoor games are more useful and educational than indoor games, no matter how entertaining they are. 2019-YDS/1/English 65. Daisy: 66. Kelsey:  Last week, I was in a situation where things went  Now, more and more experts are complaining from bad to worse. I failed to meet my end-of-year about modern parenting styles. They say parents targets at work, the central heating system in my try to create an image of success that has little to apartment broke, and my car was hit by an do with their childen’s desires, talents or needs. unknown car. All these happened in the same week! Jill:  ---- Sally:  Terrible! How do you keep calm in such Kelsey: situations?  Actually, this makes children less independent. They always feel the need to meet their parents’ Daisy: wishes and ask them what to do in their lives.  ---- Jill: Sally:  So, overparenting may prevent children from  What do you do with that information? building self-confidence and gaining the ability to adapt to an unpredictable world. Daisy: A) Parents tend to bring up their children as they were  I look at the list and focus on the ones I can do raised in the past, but it’s really difficult in this something about. Then I think about the actions ever-changing world. I can take, including asking for help if necessary. B) I think every child has a special talent, but it may A) I can think and worry about many things at the same remain undiscovered unless their parents help them time, but when I’m in the action phase, I try to avoid recognise themselves. that. C)That’s true. They want to sculpt their kids into a B) The truth is, it’s hard not to lose it in these moments. I particular kind of adult, stressing them with endless may end up giving up because of the never-ending list schedules and heavy expectations. of problems. D)I agree that parents should offer advice to their kids C)I write everything down. I draw a line, and on the left I about their future plans, but they shouldn’t forget to put down all the problems, and on the right what to do understand their wishes too. about those problems. E) In today’s world, parents are bombarded with D)In my experience, the easiest way to keep calm is to information from books and experts, so they can’t regain control of the situation by collecting information often decide how to contribute to their children’s from as many people as possible. success. E) No matter how bad things are, keeping my calm always helps me come up with a possible solution. I keep saying “This too shall pass”. 2019-YDS/1/English 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Robert: rephrased form of the given sentence.  The article I read this morning says whales stop singing when ships are nearby. Leonie: 68. Lightning sensors can pinpoint lightning strikes and  ---- provide initial attack crews with accurate locations; however, there are too many strikes to check them Robert: all, and not every strike results in a fire.  It said that they used two underwater recorders to A) Although there are too many lightning strikes to check, capture their singing in a remote area where a and not all lead to a fire, lightning sensors are effective cargo liner was the only large ship around, and at detecting them and giving initial attack crews they found that whales within 500 metres of the precise locations. ship when it passed tended to stop singing. B) There are too many lightning strikes to be checked, Leonie: most of which do not cause a fire, but lightning  So, it’s obvious that for some reason shipping sensors help initial attack crews identify them and find interferes with whale songs. the precise locations. A) Does the article say which kind of whales were C)It is impossible to check all lightning strikes that cause examined in their research? a fire as there are too many of them; nevertheless, lightning sensors can provide specific locations so that B) How did researchers observe the whales’ response to initial attack crews can check them. shipping noise? D)Lightning sensors can identify lightning strikes and C)Do researchers think that whales feel threatened and help to cope with fires through providing initial attack try to remain undetected? crews with the exact location, though it is not easy to check them all since there are too many strikes. D)Then, how do whales communicate with each other when they don’t sing? E) Lightning sensors detect so many fires caused by lightning strikes that even if they show initial attack E) Why does shipping noise have a considerable impact crews the exact location of these strikes, it is not easy on whale behaviour? to check them all. 2019-YDS/1/English 69. The birthday cake tradition in the United States is 70. People had long known of petroleum, but there little more than a century old, but the relationship of seemed to be little commercial use until 1853 when cakes and celebration has a much longer history. Samuel Kier began using it to make kerosene, a cheap substitute for the whale oil commonly used in A) People in the United States have been traditionally lamps. celebrating birthdays with cakes for a long time since the two concepts were linked to each other around a A) The development of kerosene in 1853 by Samuel Kier century ago. as an economical alternative to whale oil for lamps was not the first commercial use of petroleum because B) It was thanks to the emergence of the birthday cake people had known about it for so long, but it was the tradition in the United States less than a century ago most commercially successful enterprise. that the enduring relationship between cakes and celebration was established. B) Though being known for a long time, petroleum did not seem to be much commercial until Samuel Kier C)Despite the interconnection between cakes and developed it into kerosene in 1853 – a cheaper celebration, it was not until a little more than a century alternative to the whale oil commonly used in lamps. ago that people in the United States began to celebrate birthdays with cakes. C)Although most people had long known about the commercial uses of petroleum, there was little D)Although the birthday cake tradition in the United development of the substance until 1853 when States has a history of slightly more than a century, Samuel Kier started using it to make kerosene and cakes and celebration have been associated with each marketing it as a cheaper substitute for the whale oil other for a considerably longer time. commonly used in lamps. E) Until a little more than a century ago, people in the D)It was in 1853 that petroleum – a substance which United States celebrated birthdays with cakes, but the people had long known about but did not seem to traditional connection between cakes and celebration have much interest in – was used commercially for the is a bit older than that. first time by Samuel Kier to make kerosene, which was a more economical substitute to power lamps than the commonly used whale oil. E) In 1853, as the need for a more economical alternative to whale oil to power lamps arose, Samuel Kier saw an opportunity to make kerosene from petroleum – a substance long known for both its history and commercial uses. 2019-YDS/1/English 72-75: For these questions, choose the best 71. Ageing is a complicated process, involving DNA option to complete the missing part of the damage, chronic inflammation, and worn-out cells, passage. but we do not yet know which of these has the biggest impact on ageing. 72. ---- Yet even today, when objective evidence is A) The combination of DNA damage, chronic valued highly, most people would admit to secretly inflammation and worn-out cells affects ageing to cherishing one, or two, or many superstitions. unknown extents, making it a complicated process. Across America, tens of thousands of lottery tickets B) Because ageing is a complex process, the relationship are pencilled in every day based on nothing more or between ageing and resultant effects of DNA damage, less than people's lucky numbers. Though we now chronic inflammation and worn-out cells is largely have scientific explanations for a number of unknown. once-mysterious phenomena, daily life still holds enough unpredictability that we turn to superstitions C)As a complex process, ageing includes DNA damage, to account for the implausible. chronic inflammation and worn-out cells, though it is A) Bad-luck superstitions still keep many people from not clear which affects the ageing process the most. walking under a ladder, opening an umbrella indoors, D)Ageing, which itself is a complicated process, or boarding an airplane on Friday the thirteenth. damages DNA, causes chronic inflammation and B) Scientific studies reveal that most of the superstitious wears out cells; however, we do not yet know which beliefs we inherit involve ways to protect ourselves ptom is triggered by ageing the most. from evil. E) Ageing is characterised by damaged DNA, chronic C)Archaeologists identify Neanderthal man, who roamed inflammation and worn-out cells, but which one of throughout Western Asia 50,000 years ago, as having these makes the process more complicated is yet to produced the first superstitious belief. be determined. D)Superstitious beliefs, given their irrational nature, should have receded with the arrival of education and the advent of science. E) Supernatural beliefs come into being when particular events happen in a way that cannot be explained by reason and are followed by superstitions to help control them. 2019-YDS/1/English 73. Braille is a tactile (touch-based) system of written 74. Gothic is the style of architecture and art that language that features patterns of raised dots to succeeded Romanesque and prevailed in Europe represent letters of the alphabet, common words from the mid-12th century to the 16th century. Like and contractions, mathematical bols, and many other stylistic labels, the word was originally a punctuation. Named after its developer, Louis term of abuse. It was coined by Italian artists of the Braille, braille allows people who are blind to read Renaissance to denote the type of medieval and, with adaptive technology, to write. ---- Learning architecture they condemned as barbaric. ---- None each of the different forms of braille code is like of these features was first used in the Gothic period, learning a new language. Therefore, most people but when employed together they created a new only learn the one or two of those they are most type of skeletal structure and a sense of graceful likely to use in their daily lives. resilience that was very different in spirit from the massive solidity of Romanesque buildings. A) People whose vision is still intact can also learn braille, and should if they have regular interactions A) The Gothic style is still characterised chiefly in terms with people who are blind. of architecture – in particular by the use of pointed arches, rib vaults, and flying buttresses. B) There are a number of braille variations in common use in the US, including braille specific to music, B) The term ‘Gothic’ has also been applied to the mathematics, science, and computer programming. ornament, sculpture, and painting of the period in which Gothic architecture flourished. C)Many communities have schools and consultants who teach braille as well as libraries that provide braille C)A swaying elegance is often considered typical of publications. Gothic figures, which are generally more naturalistic and less remote than those of the Romanesque D)Nemeth braille code provides a mix of American period. literary braille, Nemeth braille, and unique bols for instruction documentation. D)This architecture was not created by the Gothic tribes who had destroyed the classical art of the Roman E) American literary braille code uses about 250 patterns Empire. to create book-length materials using short-form words, contractions, and single-cell words. E) However, the movement became more serious in tone and developed into a major strand in art. 2019-YDS/1/English 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 75. The fossil record of dinosaurs in Africa extends sentence in the passage. from the Late Triassic Period, over 200 million years ago, until the Late Cretaceous Period, presumably 65 million years ago. However, the extinction event that ended the reign of dinosaurs has yet to be 76. (I) Science that presents an organised view of the documented. Throughout this length of time, Africa universe developed with the rise of Greek civilisation, remained relatively stable geologically, changing starting about 600 BC. (II) Scholars from the Egyptian and Mesopotamian civilisations already had learned position only slightly by drifting and rotating many scientific results before the start of Greek northward. ---- The changing geography of Africa civilisation. (III) The Greeks developed institutions, such and its neighbours throughout the Mesozoic Period as the Academy, the Lyceum, and the Museum, that is fundamental to understanding the dinosaur pursued science in somewhat the way the universities fossils found there. do today. (IV)When the Academy and Lyceum were A) During the Late Triassic through the Early Jurassic, closed, and the Museum was destroyed, the Greek era major continental land masses were united into the in science was over. (V) This period, from the birth supercontinent of Pangaea. of Western civilisation in Europe to the start of what is often called the Dark Ages, can be termed 'Antiquity'. B) Late Triassic dinosaur sites are found extensively in southern Africa (particularly South Africa, Lesotho, and A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Zimbabwe) and to a lesser extent in northern Africa (Morocco). C)Thus, the dinosaur fauna of the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic are generally similar across the globe because there was only one continent rather than several continents. D)By contrast, the continents surrounding Africa moved 77. (I) The Magna Carta was a document written to satisfy greatly, resulting in ocean barriers between what were the grievances of England's barons and the Church by once contiguous land masses. clearly defining their rights and responsibilities, as well as those of the King. (II) The agreement covered E) The boundary between the Triassic and Jurassic such topics as the giving of heirs in marriage, a widow's Period is marked by extinctions globally, but it has not right to choose not to re-marry, and the handling of been studied in detail in Africa. debts following a debtor's death. (III)Of particular note though were the promises that no free man would be imprisoned except by lawful justice, nor would they be denied the right to justice. (IV)The Magna Carta was written in medieval Latin and agreed to and sealed by King John in 1215. (V) There were also restrictions placed on the use of taxation by the King and his barons, including the formation of a council that could approve or reject proposed taxes. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 2019-YDS/1/English 78. (I)The world's reef systems face overwhelming stress – threats from overfishing, pollution and climate change being the main causes. (II) Most threatened is the Caribbean reef system, with more than 80 percent of its live coral cover having disappeared since the 1970s, largely due to global warming. (III) Coral has evolved a spectacular way of maximising its chances of survival. (IV) A visual example of the damage being done is coral bleaching, which turns coral from a natural pink shade to a ghostly white. (V) It is the result of warmer waters destroying the algae that give coral its usual colour. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 79. (I)Allergies, like many conditions, tend to become worse if a person is run-down, stressed, over-tired, has a poor diet, or does not get adequate exercise. (II) An allergy is defined as a condition caused by an inappropriate or exaggerated reaction by the body’s immune system. (III)Harmless substances are misidentified by it as potentially dangerous, so the immune response is to form antibodies. (IV) These attack the perceived irritants – or allergens – on the surface of the offending substance. (V) The reaction between antibodies and allergens stimulates the release of substances within the body, such as histamine, which cause a variety of irritating ptoms. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 80. (I)The voyages of discovery of the 15th and 16th centuries unveiled whole new worlds to the European eye, worlds full of new animals, plants and people. (II)The passage to new worlds was regarded by many as a commercial opportunity. (III) These new lands were rich in raw materials, which could be traded for manufactured goods. (IV)They also offered possibilities of settlement, and a number of countries began to plant their flags in distant parts of the globe. (V)The cultivation of sugar, tobacco and other crops on the plantations depended on slave labour. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V END OF THE TEST CHECK YOUR ANSWERS O 001 2019 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 1 2019 - YDS/1 24-03-2019 1. C 48. D 2. D 49. A 3. D 50. E 4. D 51. A 5. E 52. C 6. B 53. A 7. D 54. B 8. D 55. C 9. A 56. D 10. D 57. D 11. C 58. B 12. C 59. D 13. D 60. C 14. E 61. A 15. C 62. E 16. B 63. A 17. C 64. B 18. E 65. C 19. B 66. C 20. E 67. B 21. D 68. A 22. B 69. D 23. D 70. B 24. A 71. C 25. C 72. D 26. E 73. B 27. C 74. A 28. A 75. D 29. B 76. B 30. C 77. D 31. D 78. C 32. D 79. A 33. A 80. E 34. E 35. C 36. C 37. A 38. D 39. A 40. C 41. D 42. B 43. C 44. D 45. C 46. E 47. C T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE 27 EYLÜL 2020 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. As the DNA of two unrelated people only differs by expression to fill the space. about one in every 1,000 base pairs, humans show ---- little genetic diversity. 1. Twenty-five hundred years ago, ancient Greek A)remarkably B)elaborately philosophers turned their highly sophisticated C)ambiguously D)sufficiently ---- away from the whims of the gods and toward questions of the natural world. E)promptly A)inquiries B)fallacies C)incentives D)complaints E)precautions 5. Biologists have created a molecule that ---- the connections between brain cells, called neurons, acting exactly like the steel bars in reinforced 2. The mission control experts cannot tell if the space concrete. junk is going to hit the space station or not, but they A)penetrates B)overcomes are sure that a ---- would knock a hole in the body and cause all air inside it to quickly escape into C)implements D)fortifies space. A)succession B)collision E)receives C)conversion D)fluctuation E)deviation 6. Internet users are increasingly ---- cyberchondria, a mental condition in which easy access to information on medical issues causes increased feelings of anxiety over health. 3. While newspapers have been in dramatic decline in A)making up for B)cutting down on much of the developed West, the industry is ---- and still growing in many of Asia’s booming cities. C)getting away with D)looking around for A)fragile B)profitable E)coming down with C)confidential D)peculiar E)notorious 1 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. Wall paintings previously ---- in three Spanish caves word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). have now been dated to 65,000 years ago – some 20,000 years before Homo sapiens is thought ---- in Europe. 7. So far, only two types of mental exertion ---- to A) to have been discovered / to arrive improve overall cognitive ability: one is musical training, the other is learning a new language or B) being discovered / having arrived practising a second one you ----. A) were shown / will have already learned C)discovered / to have arrived B) had been shown / have already been learning D)having been discovered / to be arriving C)have been shown / have already learned E) to be discovered / arriving D)will be shown / already learned E) are shown / had already learned 10. A compound called ‘hyloins’ that can be found in the frog's lymph and skin glands increases the frog's brightness ---- around 20 percent ---- a full moon. 8. If an age could ever be rightly described as ‘dark’ in A)by / during B)in / under European history, it ---- the two centuries that ---- the collapse of Roman authority in Britain at the C)at / over D)to / along beginning of the fifth century. A) may be / follow E)from / through B) would be / followed C)used to be / had followed D)must be / have followed E) had to be / were following 11. The scientific study of the dynamic relationship ---- the celestial bodies of the solar system and the motion of human-made objects ---- outer space, such as spacecraft and satellites, is called orbital mechanics. A)about / on B)between / at C)with / of D)among / in E)beyond / without 2 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 12. ---- electricity and heat account for 41 percent of 15. Finding ammonia on the surface of Pluto could be a global carbon dioxide emissions today, curbing hint of more complex organic chemistry on the climate change will require satisfying that much planet, although it is ---- cold ---- there is almost demand with renewables rather than fossil fuels. definitely no life there. A)Since B)While A)not only / but also B)both / and C)Until D)Unless C)neither / nor D)such / that E)As if E)so / that 13. ---- all dogs show signs of having ‘theory of mind’, 16. ---- the Sun’s constant stream of energy, water which enables them to grasp that we think molecules are continually evaporating from the differently from them, it is unlikely that they are surfaces of oceans and lakes, adding to the water capable of extending this to knowing the reason vapour in the air. why one person behaves differently to another. A)Rather than B)Thanks to A)In case B)Only if C)As opposed to D)In terms of C)As far as D)Given that E)Unlike E)Even though 14. ---- there are hundreds of school- and community-based aggression prevention and social skills promotion programmes, only a handful of these appear to be effective. A)Provided that B)Since C)Although D)Just as E)Unless 3 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19. passage. A)in terms of B)thanks to The first civilisations emerged in areas where high C)in place of D)by contrast with agricultural productivity was possible, supporting dense populations. In the Old World, they appeared (17)---- the E)by means of rivers in Mesopotamia, northern India, Egypt and northern China. Craft specialisation developed, trade flourished, writing began, and rulers were often given elaborate burials. (18)----, each civilisation also had unique features rooted in its own cultural background and environment. Life in Ancient Egypt evolved around the Nile, which provided a regular water supply and fertile soils and thus, (19)---- the surrounding desert regions, made agricultural production possible. 20. Navigation on the river was easy, as boats (20)---- A) could travel northwards with the current. From the 5th millennium BC, farming communities on the banks of the Nile B) ought to travel gradually began to merge into a cultural, political and economic unit. This process of unification was (21)---- by trading contacts and the need to control the floodwaters C)may have travelled of the Nile. To reap the benefits of the yearly flooding of the river, communities had to work together to build D)must have travelled dams and flood basins. E) would have travelled 21. 17. A)abandoned B)distributed A)at B)into C)encouraged D)overlooked C)with D)along E)threatened E)toward 18. A)Instead B)However C)For instance D)Otherwise E)That is 4 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)from B)upon Colliding tankers, damaged platforms and pipelines, as C)against D)for well as the release of residual oil from oil tanks, are potential causes for catastrophes. Pictures of dying E)without seabirds show the (22)---- of such environmental damage. Yet, not all environmental hazards are this obvious. Water pollution (23)---- by the uncontrolled use of pesticides and heavy metals, such as mercury, lead, cadmium, and zinc, largely remains unnoticed. The dangerous prior assumption that the oceans could naturally purify themselves (24)---- limit has caused possibly irreparable damage. Not only the oceans, but many creeks, rivers, and lakes have also suffered from 25. human interference. Many lakes have become polluted A)except for B)because of (25)---- the chemicals added by household wastewater and the overfertilisation with phosphates in agriculture. C)contrary to D)rather than (26)----, unknown effluents from industry and acid rain add to the acidification of water bodies, which contributes to the decrease of biodiversity. E)in pursuit of 22. A)improvement B)extent 26. C)suspension D)eradication A)For instance B)Therefore E)release C)Even so D)Moreover E)Instead 23. A) having triggered B) triggered C)to have been triggered D)triggering E) to have triggered 5 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. As more people suffer from insecure attachment option to complete the given sentence. styles in their relationships with others, ----. A) they feel that they do not need their belongings to survive anymore 27. Because there has been growing public awareness regarding cultural and ethnic differences around the B) seeing possessions as an extension of themselves world, ----. starts to decrease A) tourists, who search for unfamiliar environments and cultures, also search for familiar facilities available for C)the needs for security are more complex than just the them basics for physical survival B) the true cultural heritage of the host society maintains D)possessions do not make them feel secure by its integrity by keeping tourists on the other side of the substituting for the loved ones curtain E) the behaviour of seeking emotional comfort from C)culture is seen as a dynamic living concept and material objects is likely to rise changes continually in order to embrace the needs of present-day society D)it has been argued that so-called authenticity of culture is a fleeting movement in the development calendar E) there has been increasing demand for tourism products that offer cultural authenticity rather than 30. While mainstream cultural artefacts (films, books, standard concepts fashion, etc.) produced specifically for and about girls have been popular for more than two centuries, ----. A) academic research on girls and their complex relationship with girl culture is still fairly new to the communication discipline B) early research on this topic tended to focus on girls as 28. Although all archaeologists agree that keeping audiences and as vulnerable to the effects of mass careful records of an excavation is essential to good culture practice, ----. C)communication scholars examining girl culture today A) there is a close relationship between their have been greatly influenced by girls’ or girlhood interpretation and that of archaeological museums studies B) they are concerned with the activities of people and D)a new area that is mainly interested in how girls nature that create evidence of a cultural past actively negotiate and even resist these cultural artefacts is needed C)artefacts, sculptures and drawings found in caves help them learn about early humans E) many researchers have examined the Internet as a space fostering girls’ self-expression and community D)many mapping techniques developed for use on land building have also been adapted for underwater archaeology E) there is no certain consensus on what exactly constitutes archaeological data 6 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 31. When bacteria sense that their numbers have 33. ----, few realise that moderate to vigorous physical reached a critical threshold, ----. activity done regularly completely changes our bodies from the inside out. A) the drugs that will interrupt this process are still being researched A) Since regular movement prevents certain cancers and lowers the risk of diabetes B) they switch on the production of substances that attack their human host B) As scientists have developed methods for measuring intensity of aerobic exercise C)we are not still sure about how to prevent them from increasing in number C)While most people inherently know that they are supposed to leave sedentary habits D)some are mostly resistant to many common antibiotics, making an infection hard to treat D)Although many are not aware that being physically active expands lung capacity E) plant products have been reported to have no significant effect on their growth E) Unless prolonged sitting denies people some of the health advantages of regular exercise 32. It may be a long time before scientists can confirm that biological life exists in places other than Earth, 34. ----, food shortages will be inevitable, leading to ----. mass starvation and unrest. A) but recent discovery of tiny life forms in some extreme A) Because many governments are committed to conditions and inhospitable environments has raised avoiding a reduction in farming subsidies and financial hopes speculation nowadays B) as scientists have long known that amino acids and B) Unless a solution to the dramatic increase in world nucleotides, the main ingredients for building proteins population and the demand for food is found and DNA, can be found in meteors and comets C)While the growing population in some parts of the C)while it takes a lot of intellectual effort on the part of world increasingly demand a more varied diet ordinary people to understand the dynamics of life in outer space D)Since the increase in oil prices has appeared in many developing nations in the last several decades D)though professional associations informing the public about microbial life in space have not been very E) If worldwide drought, which affects wide territories, is successful seen as the consequence of climate change E) so the discovery of the bacteria in Antarctica, which live by extracting nutrition from the air, indicates that life can thrive without complex organic material 7 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. The consequences of eating disorders need to be English, and the most accurate English translation taken seriously, ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) whereas there is growing interest in and worry about their potential risks and treatment methods 37. Because volcanic activity has usually been B) while evidence is now emerging that they occur in a extremely violent and destructive, in the past there wide range of socioeconomic groups were some cultures believing that eruptions and tremblings had to be the fault of humans. C)given that they might increase one’s risk of developing A) Volkanik faaliyetler genellikle aşırı derecede şiddetli ve conditions such as high blood pressure and diabetes yıkıcı oldukları için geçmişte patlamaların ve sarsılmaların insanların hatasından kaynaklandığını D)though clinical depression and anxiety disorders have düşünen bazı kültürler vardı. been reported to commonly co-occur with eating disorders B) Volkanik faaliyetlerin genellikle aşırı derecede şiddetli ve yıkıcı olmasından dolayı geçmişte bazı kültürler E) so patients who engage in binge eating, which is patlamaların ve sarsılmaların insanların hatasından highly associated with obesity, suffer from numerous kaynaklandığına inanıyordu. health issues C)Genellikle aşırı derecede şiddetli ve yıkıcı olan volkanik faaliyetler yüzünden geçmişte yaşanan patlamaların ve sarsılmaların insanların hatasından kaynaklandığına inanan bazı kültürler vardı. D)Geçmişte patlamaların ve sarsılmaların insanların hatasından kaynaklandığına inanan kültürler 36. Most classic research indicates that it is extremely olmasının sebebi, bazı volkanik faaliyetlerin genellikle son derece şiddetli ve yıkıcı olmasıydı. difficult to identify boys from girls on behavioural grounds when children are under two years of age E) Geçmişte patlamaların ve sarsılmaların insanların ----. hatasından kaynaklandığına inanan bazı kültürlerin A) unless there are some external cultural indicators of olması, volkanik faaliyetlerin genellikle son derece gender such as clothing şiddetli ve yıkıcı olmasından kaynaklanıyordu. B) so that the impact of gender in young children’s lives could be examined in great detail C)if young children know about gender and acquire gendered ways of being and thinking from an early age D)given that preschool children often actively maintain gender stereotypes in their own behaviours and that of their peers E) because there has recently been a focus on how boys and girls play with the toys they choose 8 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 38. According to a recent report, early adopters of 39. One of the biggest difficulties of a manager is enterprise artificial intelligence have shown a bigger possibly demonstrating leadership in a context improvement in productivity and performance where those being directed neither believe they compared to those that have yet to explore this need to be organised, nor are motivated to exciting new field. cooperate with the administration. A) Yeni bir rapora göre, yapay zekâ girişimini önceden A) Bir yönetici için muhtemelen en büyük zorluklardan benimseyenler, bu heyecan verici yeni alanı henüz biri, yönetilenlerin ya organize edilmeleri gerektiğine keşfetmemiş olanlara kıyasla verimlilik ve performans inanmadıkları ya da yönetimle işbirliği yapmaya istekli bakımından daha büyük bir gelişme göstermiştir. olmadıkları bir ortamda liderlik göstermektir. B) Yeni hazırlanan bir rapora göre, yapay zekâ girişimini B) Bir yöneticinin en büyük zorluklarından biri daha keşfetmemiş olanların aksine, bu heyecan verici muhtemelen, yönetilenlerin ne organize edilmeleri yeni alanı önceden kullanmaya başlayanlar verimlilik gerektiğine inandıkları ne de yönetimle işbirliği ve performans konularında daha çok ilerleme yapmaya istekli oldukları bir ortamda liderlik kaydetmiştir. göstermektir. C)Yeni bir rapora göre, yeni ve heyecan verici yapay C)Bir yöneticinin yaşayabileceği en büyük zorluklardan zekâ girişimini önceden benimseyenlerin, bu alanı biri muhtemelen, organize edilmeye ihtiyaç henüz keşfetmeyenlere göre, verimlilik ve performans duymayanların ve yönetimle işbirliği yapmayanların açısından çok daha fazla ilerleme kaydettiği olduğu bir ortamda liderlik göstermektir. görülmüştür. D)Bir yönetici olmanın muhtemel en büyük zorluğu, D)Yeni hazırlanan bir rapor, yapay zekâ girişimini yönetilenlerin organize edilme gereksinimi önceden edinenlerin, bu heyecan verici yeni alanı duymadıkları için yönetimle işbirliği yapmaya istekli keşfetmeyenlerle karşılaştırıldığında verimlilik ve olmadığı bir ortamda liderlik göstermektir. performans bakımından daha fazla gelişme ortaya koyduğunu göstermiştir. E) Bir yöneticinin yaşayabileceği en büyük zorluk muhtemelen, yönetilenleri ne organize olmaya E) Yeni bir rapor, yapay zekâ girişimini önceden inandırabildiği ne de yönetimle işbirliği yapmaya benimseyenlerde verimlilik ve performans alanındaki motive edebildiği bir ortamda liderlik göstermektir. gelişmelerin bu yeni ve heyecan verici alanı keşfetmeyenlere kıyasla daha fazla olduğunu göstermiştir. 9 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 40. Koalalar yüksek miktarlarda su içeren okaliptus 41. Dünya, 66 milyon yıl önce dinozorların neslini yapraklarıyla beslenirler, bu yüzden nadiren su tükettiği düşünülen ve sıcaklıkları 5ºC'ye kadar içmeye ihtiyaç duyarlar ve böylelikle yerdeki artıran bir asteroid etkisinden kaynaklanan sıcak bir yırtıcılardan kurtulmuş olarak ağaçlarda uzun saatler dönem geçirmiştir. kalabilirler. A) The Earth underwent a hot period that stemmed from A) Koalas feed on eucalyptus leaves that consist of high an asteroid impact thought to have wiped out the amounts of water, and as a result, they rarely need to dinosaurs 66 million years ago and caused drink water, which means they can stay in trees for temperatures to rise by 5ºC. long hours, away from predators on land. B) A hot period experienced by the Earth is thought to B) Because koalas eat eucalyptus leaves that have have caused the extinction of the dinosaurs 66 years excessive amounts of water, they hardly need to drink ago leading to an asteroid impact with a 5ºC increase water and thus they can stay in trees for long hours, in temperatures. away from predators on land. C)The extinction of the dinosaurs is thought to have C)Koalas feed on eucalyptus leaves that contain high resulted from the 5ºC rise in the temperatures during amounts of water, so they hardly need to drink water, the hot period due to an asteroid impact the Earth and therefore they can stay in trees for long hours, experienced 66 million years ago. safe from predators on land. D)A hot period is thought to have dominated the Earth, D)Eucalyptus leaves that koalas feed on are composed wiping out the dinosaurs 66 million years ago after a of excessive amounts of water, so they rarely need to 5ºC increase in the temperatures together with an drink water and thus they can stay in trees for long asteroid impact. hours, which keeps them away from predators on land. E) The Earth underwent a hot period with the influence of the dinosaurs that became extinct 66 million years ago E) Koalas rely on eucalyptus leaves for nourishment, and with an asteroid impact, resulting in the rising of the since they have high amounts of water, koalas temperatures by 5ºC. scarcely need to drink water, and consequently, they can stay in trees for long hours, free from predators on land. 10 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 42. Avustralya’daki bir çocuk hastanesinde çalışan uzmanlar, bazı insanların 20’li yaşlarına kadar büyümeye devam ettiğine dair pek çok kanıt ortaya koyarak ergenliğin bittiği kabul edilen yaşın 19’dan 24’e çıkarılması gerektiğini öne sürmektedir. A) Experts working at a children’s hospital in Australia suggest that the recognised age at which adolescence ends should be raised to 24 from 19, revealing plenty of evidence that some people keep growing into their 20s. B) Experts working at a children’s hospital in Australia have provided plenty of evidence that some people keep growing into their 20s, and therefore they claim that the recognised age at which adolescence ends should be raised to 24 from 19. C)The recognised age at which adolescence ends is 19, but experts working at a children’s hospital in Australia claim that it should be raised to 24, providing lots of evidence that some people keep growing into their 20s. D)Provided that there is abundant evidence suggesting that some people keep growing into their 20s, experts working at a children’s hospital in Australia point out that the recognised age at which adolescence ends, which is 19, should be raised to 24. E) The claim that the recognised age at which adolescence ends should be raised to 24 from 19 has been made by the experts working at a children’s hospital in Australia, who have revealed plenty of evidence that some people keep growing into their 20s. 11 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. What can be concluded from the passage about the initial period of life? A) children who are shy during this period will be shy Most people, from those who are fond of living alone to throughout their lives no matter what they do. the rich and famous, probably have experienced feelings of shyness at various times in their lives. B) If children are shy with others during this period, they Physiological ptoms may include blushing, should be observed psychologically. increased heart rate, sweating, and shaking. Just as these outward manifestations vary in type and intensity C)It might be highly influential on whether a person will from person to person, so do the inner feelings. Anxious be shy in later life. thoughts and worries, low self-esteem, self-criticism, and concern over a lack of social skills, real or D)It is not easy to overcome shyness during this period imagined, are common. Nevertheless, the causes of because personality traits do not change until young shyness are not known. Some researchers believe it adulthood. results from a genetic predisposition. Others theorize E) It is the period when children should learn some that uncommunicative parents restrict a child’s self-help techniques to overcome their shyness. development of the social skills that compensate for discomfort caused by new experiences and people, resulting in shyness. Variously, it has been considered a ptom of social phobia or a simple characteristic of introversion. Psychological research that follows large numbers of children from very early childhood to adulthood has found that a tendency to be shy with 45. It could be inferred from the passage that ----. others is one of the most stable traits that is preserved from the first three or four years of life through young A) shyness is most likely to be seen among children adulthood. Learning or improving social skills through whose parents were shy in their childhood self-help courses or formal training in assertiveness and public speaking are some of the methods used to B) it can be the parents who are responsible for shyness diminish the effects of shyness. due to their parenting style or the genetic characteristics they pass on to their children C)shyness could be considered a form of social phobia, so medical help should be sought to eliminate it D)the psychological effects of shyness can be intense if 43. The author clearly states that shyness ----. physiological ptoms are accompanied by inner A) is a widespread phenomenon likely to be experienced thoughts by people from different walks of life E) although we do not know the causes of shyness for B) makes itself clear through several ptoms that are sure, it is easy to get rid of this condition unvaryingly seen C)is generally accompanied by some inner feelings caused by imaginary conditions D)is a psychological condition which is caused by several well-known triggers E) can be detected by others easily as most of its ptoms are visible 12 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 46. What is the purpose of the author of this passage? A) To elaborate on the impact of genetic factors on shyness B) To report the findings of recent research into the effects and triggers of shyness C)To give the reader some advice on how to overcome shyness D)To give brief information about the ptoms and possible causes of shyness E) To discuss whether shyness is a challenging psychological problem 13 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. It can be inferred from the passage that in Latin America, ----. A) the abolishment of slavery aroused such problems as During the 19th century, in most of Central and South social inequality and political instability America, a large majority of the population was of African origin. Most were slaves working on plantations, B) military dictatorships were a big obstacle to the producing crops such as sugar and coffee for European economic development of most countries consumers. Slavery was abolished gradually in varying degrees in Central and South America starting in the C)rapid growth was mainly due to political achievements early 1800s, with Brazil being the last country to outlaw and successful management of social conflicts slavery in 1888. After abolition, freed slaves often joined the lower strata of hierarchical societies in which poverty D)the welfare of citizens greatly improved in most and inequality were made worse by unfair land countries after the abolishment of slavery redistribution. In Latin America, independence did not E) freed slaves were not allowed to purchase land for a lead to widespread prosperity or good government, but long time even after the abolishment of slavery merely to imbalance of power and economic inequality. Military dictatorships were common, as were wars and civil conflicts. Meanwhile, Brazil experienced a ‘rubber boom’ from the 1880s, which fuelled an unprecedented economic expansion in Latin America thanks to the extraction and commercialisation of wild rubber from the jungles of the Amazon. However, development was entirely based on investment from Europe and North 49. According to the passage, which of the following is America, and was largely designed to serve the needs true about Brazil’s rubber boom? of the industrialised countries, not the local people. A) The needs of Brazilian people were secondary to those of industrialised countries. B) Local people played a more dominant role in the boom when compared to European and American investors. 47. It is understood from the passage that during the C)It was developed for the local people of Brazil to help 19th century, ----. them escape poverty. A) most slaves in Latin American countries were able to D)It was not as successful as European and American become part of the ruling and wealthy classes once investors had estimated. they gained independence B) most of the crops produced by slaves were sold to E) It was the underlying cause of many wars and civil local consumers in Latin America conflicts in the area. C)the abolishment of slavery did not happen at the same time and rate in Central and South America D) many Latin American countries began to abolish slavery after Brazil outlawed it E) there had been no serious attempts to outlaw slavery in Latin America until 1888 14 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 50. What is the primary purpose of the author? A) To explain why slavery was widely practised in Latin America during the 19th century B) To clarify when slavery was completely ended in Latin America C)To discuss some consequences of the abolishment of slavery in Latin America D)To emphasise the considerable efforts of slaves to gain independence in Latin America E) To justify that investment from Europe and North America helped to end slavery in Latin America 15 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. Which of the following is true according to the passage? A) Yeasts and moulds turn acid into sugar before people Making food is one thing; keeping it is another. In their consume fruits. natural state, all the organic materials we eat are perishable. After a certain period of time, they go bad – B) Yeasts and moulds may colonise bacteria and insects smell bad, taste bad, look bad. Even if they do not in warm and low-acid conditions. become downright unappetising, foods lose nutritional value as vitamins degrade due to heat, strong light, air, C)Efforts to avoid food spoilage have been around since or water. In preserving foods, the first order of business people began cooking meat over a fire. is to prevent yeasts, moulds, bacteria, and insects from devouring them before we do. Yeasts and moulds thrive D)Food preservation started in the 19th century with the on acidic fruits and convert their sugars to an acidic fizz. advent of pasteurisation. Bacteria prefer meat, dairy products, and low-acid E) All types of bacteria release toxins, causing acute food vegetables; if allowed to proliferate, they create acid and poisoning. other waste products that destroy food. Certain bacteria can overrun a person's gastrointestinal tract or release dangerous toxins, causing the misery of acute food poisoning. People have tried to prevent food spoilage since they first started cooking meat over a fire – smoking, salting, drying, and pickling have been around for millennia. The science of food preservation, however, advanced considerably in the 19th century 53. Which of the following is true according to the with the advent of such processes as pasteurisation. passage? A) Cooking meat over a fire could cause bacteria to proliferate easily on it. B) The 19th century is the period in which the science of food preservation bloomed. 51. According to the passage, even if foods do not go bad quickly, ----. C)Drying and salting prevent food spoilage as they A) they may contribute less to our health after a period of reduce acidity of the food. exposure to certain factors D)Pasteurisation has reduced the practice of other food B) they could perish if they are exposed to direct sunlight preservation techniques. E) Problems in the gastrointestinal tract are usually the C)insects and bacteria detect them easily due to their result of food poisoning. bad smell D)they may cause changes in a person's gastrointestinal tract E) people do not wish to eat foods exposed to heat or water for a long time 16 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 54. What can be said about foods according to the passage? A) Meat, dairy products and low-acid vegetables are the only foods bacteria proliferate. B) If it is still appetising, consumption of food is harmless even if it is affected by any bacteria. C)Food spoilage is inevitable unless foods are preserved through specific processes. D)People tend to keep their spoiled foods even if they look unappetising. E) Pasteurisation is accepted as the most efficient way to prevent foods from going bad. 17 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. It can be inferred from the passage that the relevant questions asked in a standard lie test ----. A) are expected to induce standard bodily responses A lie detector is a device intended to detect an from the respondent involuntary physiological response that all persons exhibit when lying but never when telling the truth. B) are used to disguise the control questions, which yield However, the lie detector of popular fancy is typical reactions mythological. In actual ‘lie protector’ tests, breathing movements, blood pressure changes and electrodermal C)would not be of much use without the control responses are recorded on a polygraph while the questions respondent answers “yes” or “no” to a series of 8 to 12 questions. From the polygraph recordings, one can D)indicate that the respondent is lying if he or she reacts determine whether ‘relevant’ questions had a greater normally to them impact on the respondent than did the interpolated E) consistently lead to similar bodily changes in innocent ‘control’ questions. In the standard lie test used in people specific issue investigations, the relevant questions ask whether the respondent committed the act in question; for example, “On April 12, did you take $2000 from the office safe?” A typical control question might be, “Have you ever stolen anything?” If the examinee reacts more strongly to the relevant than to the control questions, it is inferred that his/her answers to the relevant questions are deceptive. Because an innocent accused also may 57. What is the disadvantage of the test used in specific be disturbed by the relevant questions and react more issue investigations? strongly to them than to the controls, the lie test is A) Some truthful test takers might be unwilling to answer biased against the truthful respondent. Research has the control questions because they do not seem shown that as many as 50 percent of innocent criminal relevant. suspects may ‘fail’ lie protector tests. B) Honest people may overreact to the questions, which makes it hard to differentiate them from the liars. C)The answers given to the control questions bear no relation to the answers to the relevant ones. 55. Which of the following is true about lie detectors? D)A majority of innocent people are falsely accused due A) The number of the control questions surpasses that of to their unwillingness to react to the relevant the relevant questions in actual lie protector tests. questions. B) A lie detector device actually works differently from E) Researchers usually find the test unreliable, which what is usually imagined. makes the test impractical for investigative purposes. C)One can monitor extraordinary differences in a person’s psychology during a lie protector test. D)They record bodily responses evoked particularly by control questions. 58. Which could be the best title for this passage? E) The respondent’s bodily reactions are examined before the questions are asked. A) How to Deceive Lie Detectors B) Question Types for Lie Protector Tests C)The Basic Working Principle of Lie Detectors D)The History and Development of Lie Detectors E) Investigating Financial Crime through Lie Detectors 18 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. Why is it important to read outside your favourite genre? A) To imitate the great writers who have written before We all start out as readers, don’t we? First, it is picture you books read to us by mum or dad. Then we begin to recognise sounds, letters, and words, and to take the B) To learn about different styles and structures available first steps towards becoming readers ourselves. Many of us got the reading bug when we were young, and books C)To see which of the genres are making the biggest read in childhood can stay with us forever. Reading is profits often the first piece of advice any aspiring writer is given. If you want to become a published author, it is a D)To decide what genre is the best for your target group pretty good idea to take a look at what has been of readers published so far – and to see what is being published now. First, read the kind of stuff you yourself want to E) To get inspired by the popular themes of the great write. Whatever that is – romance, crime, sci-fi, thrillers, writers memoirs, sagas, fantasy, non-fiction, it is sensible to see what is already out there. Secondly, take a look at what is being written outside your own genre. The more widely you read, the more you will learn. See how others do it and find out what works for you – and what does not. Learn how successful authors keep their readers turning the pages. Finally, do not ignore the everyday 61. Which of the following can replace the underlined stuff you cannot get away from: newspapers and verb ‘count’ in the passage? magazines, TV advertisements, websites, social media A)stimulate B)imply and so on. Ultimately, as a writer, you need to use words effectively to make every word count. C)matter D)occur E)necessitate 59. Which of the following is true about the books people read in childhood according to the passage? A) People form their reading habits thanks to the pictures these books contain. 62. What is the main purpose of the author? B) Children’s books are usually better than picture books A) To give information on how to read more effectively in helping become a published writer. B) To explain briefly what the great authors do and do not C)Such books are written for the purpose of teaching do sounds and letters. C)To describe the similarities and differences between D)We often remember them throughout the course of our reading and writing lives. D)To offer some guidelines to people wanting to become E) It may not be possible to become a good writer without writers analysing them carefully. E) To compare and contrast a variety of literary genres for the enthusiasts 19 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Molly: option to complete the dialogue.  So, I really liked the film. Actually, it really went way beyond my expectations. 63. Mary: James:  So, I’ve decided to participate in the Citizen  Yeah, the special effects were pretty cool but I Science movement. didn’t like how long the film was. I mean, seriously, why would any film need to be nearly Hilda: three hours long?  And what exactly are you expected to do as part of this movement? Molly:  Well, with this kind of film it takes a lot of time to Mary: develop the plot and the characters. Don’t you  Nothing special, in fact. Science volunteers can think so? contribute to global science studies by simply monitoring whales offshore or hawks and stars in James: the sky.  ---- Hilda: Molly:  ----  I get what you’re saying, but I still think most of them were needed in the film so that it could Mary: convey its message to the audience in a  Not really! It’s simple to do with basic technology, meaningful way. like smartphone apps. So, you can easily collect A) Not really. But since this was a sequel it must have data and share it with other members of the taken longer to develop some of the themes of the movement. story for people who haven’t seen the first one. A) That’s interesting. So they invite you to be an amateur researcher who offers help for free? B) I agree that it must be a challenge for the writers to take such a complex plot and develop it into a shorter B) Sounds impressive. Would you need to use special film, but I still got really bored. equipment in order to record these things? C)Nope, but I think the problem is actually with the C)That’s exciting. But don’t you think you should be able cinema itself rather than the film. In some countries, a to earn money for this kind of work? break is given partway through the film. We need that, too. D)Hmm, I see. Doesn’t this benefit the research team D)Well, you have a point there. It does take time. Maybe more than it benefits the volunteers? the problem was with the story itself. I believe many critics would just agree with me. E) Wow. Is accuracy one of the top priorities for these types of observations? E) Actually, I don’t. Some of the scenes were unnecessary because they didn’t stick to the central theme of the story. 20 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 65. Maggie: 66. Alan:  Last week you said you didn’t feel so well and  We are all told to exercise more, but for those you’d join a gym. with physical disabilities, the benefits of aerobic exercise have always been out of reach. I think Lucy: scientists need to find a solution for this.  That’s true, but I have so much work to do that I can hardly find the time to even call up for Chelsea: information on how to best get fit.  In fact, I have read about a recent study which aims to develop a kind of drug that will create the Maggie: effect of exercise for those with physical  ---- disabilities. Lucy: Alan:  It’s definitely better than nothing. Maybe I can try  ---- to discipline myself and start doing some stretching at my office. Chelsea:  Thanks to the medication, the genes which prove A) You keep finding excuses, and I think the problem is your tendency to delay. If you really want to create resistant to weight gain can be activated without some time, I’m sure you can find a way. any physical training. A) How can that drug compensate for the lack of physical B) Actually, you don’t really need a gym. Most activity? professionals say even five minutes of light exercise can be beneficial for your health. B) How interested would you be in taking the drug yourself? C)You’d better get some advice from a doctor rather than hit the gym. Using prescribed medicines can help you C)How often is the drug taken to activate fat burning lose weight in a controlled way. mechanisms? D)You shouldn’t worry so much about trivial things. Going to the gym can make you feel happy, as the key D)How do disabled people feel after taking this kind of to a happy life is to be able to find pleasure in small drug? things. E) How much do they agree on the impact of the drug on E) I think you should reorganise your weekly schedule. people? There are various techniques for planning your day so that you can have some time for yourself. 21 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Patient: rephrased form of the given sentence.  I have a sore throat and this is the third in the last six months. My tonsils will probably need to be removed. 68. Recent studies have suggested that underground Doctor: water does not freeze despite temperatures being as  It used to be a common practice a few decades low as -70ºC, as it is prevented by salt present in the ago, but today we approach tonsil removal with water. much more caution. A) It has been suggested by recent studies that because the salt in the water prevents freezing, water Patient: underground stays liquid even when the temperature  ---- is as low as -70ºC. Doctor: B) As recent studies have suggested, underground water  We take little notice of our palatine tonsils, except freezes when the temperature reaches -70ºC, despite when they are sore, but they activate our immune the fact that salt in water generally prevents freezing. system, recognising pathogens entering through the mouth and nose. C)Recent studies have suggested that water remains liquid under the ground until the temperature reaches -70ºC and enough salt is present. Patient:  So I should take better care of them instead of D)According to some recent studies, as underground having them removed. water remains liquid even at temperatures as low as A) I can’t see why patients are driven to such risks. There -70ºC, the salt stops the water from freezing at higher must be a good side that may be less obvious to us. temperatures. B) But when inflamed, they are extremely painful. Why E) Recent studies have maintained that as soon as the should I tolerate them if I can easily get rid of them? temperature reaches -70ºC, the salt in underground water prevents its freezing. C)So vaccination can provide protection against specific diseases? Is it possible to prevent infection this way? D)Oh! I would have had medical treatment instead of having them removed through surgery if I had known that. E) Does it really make sense? Surgery is supposed to be the last option in such cases regarding the immune system. 22 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 69. Thinking about 'what-ifs' is commonly thought to be 71. Although the household technological products are a futile exercise; however, it helps individuals make interesting to users from all age groups, they are sense of their past experiences and prepare for the particularly significant to older people with sensory future. or motor limitations, due to the high degree of operational comfort and safety they offer. A) Thinking about 'what-ifs' is thought to be helpful in taking lessons from past experiences and being more A) Household technological products offer a high level of cautious about the future, even though it is actually an operational comfort and safety to people of all ages; exercise that has no meaning. nevertheless, it is the elderly who find them the most useful, especially if they have sensory and motor B) Although it is widely believed to be an unnecessary limitations. exercise, making sense of past experiences lets individuals think about 'what-ifs', teaching them life B) Household technological products attract the attention lessons in the long run. of consumers of all ages, but they are especially important to the elderly who have sensory and motor C)People should think about their 'what-ifs' because it is limitations as these devices provide a great degree of not a pointless exercise; it is something that is useful operational comfort and safety. and effective for both the past and future. C)Despite the fact that people from various age groups D)Thinking about 'what-ifs' is not only a popular activity are interested in household technology, the biggest exercised by many, but also a sensible tool to make group who needs them is the elderly since they seek a meanings of the past and get ready for future high degree of operational comfort and safety because experiences in advance. of their sensory and motor limitations. E) Contrary to popular belief, thinking about 'what-ifs' is D)Household technological devices are significant for not a useless exercise; it is rather something that lets people make meaningful inferences about the past people of all ages, but they are especially important to and be ready for the future. those with sensory and motor limitations, such as old people, because these devices are comfortable and safe to operate. E) Though many people find household technological devices important owing to their high level of operational comfort and safety, these devices are particularly aimed at people with sensory and motor 70. The only time that an analysis procedure can help is limitations, regardless of their age. when the user is fully aware not only of its strong points, but its shortcomings as well. A) The user is to be fully aware of both the strengths and weaknesses of an analysis procedure to be able to benefit from it. B) An analysis procedure should have more strong points than shortcomings in order for the user to be aware of its benefits. C)Both the strengths and weaknesses of an analysis procedure should be fully evaluated before the user becomes aware of its benefits. D)An analysis procedure can help the user only if the user acknowledges the strong points rather than its shortcomings. E) The shortcomings of an analysis procedure can reduce its benefits only when the user is not fully aware of its strong points. 23 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 72-75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the 73. At the very least, the egocentric bias causes us to passage. misunderstand others. It undermines empathy and tolerance. It also traps us in a bubble and we waste vast amount of psychic energy recovering from 72. With few exceptions, the Austronesian languages insults that were never targeted at us in the first are closely interrelated. In spite of their very large place. To live a life that is less reactive, more number and the enormous expanse of the territories directed, it is necessary to put the ego in its place. occupied by them, it is very easy to recognise their ---- We can then see situations with clarity and genetic interrelationship. ---- As a result of this, the approach them effectively. We may even see the total number of Austronesian languages is a wisdom in others’ point of view, and learn from contentious issue. Taking this into account, the them. approximate number of Austronesian languages of A) We can cognitively prompt ourselves to recognise that given areas, and the number of their speakers in our own point of view is not the only one, or these areas could be detected only if a wide-scale necessarily the best one. scientific study is conducted. A) Because of their great similarity to each other, it is B) Social psychologists say our tilt to egocentricity is often difficult to establish whether certain varieties are deeply ingrained as it helps us maintain a coherent different languages, or dialects of one language. narrative of the events in our lives. B) Phonologically, Austronesian languages are, with a C)Even so, it is essential for all of us to recognise the few exceptions, fairly simple. egocentric bias for what it is: an adaptive illusion. C)Like other language groups, the Austronesian D)There are some situations in which such ego-shifts languages are thought to have originated thousands of occur naturally, with little effort ─ sublime experiences years ago. that defy comprehension. D)The recognition of the genetic interrelationship and E) Some studies also find that memento mori, reminders initial classification of Austronesian languages had its of the impermanence of life, also displace the self from beginnings in the nineteenth century. centre stage. E) There are four types of indigenous languages in the Australasia and the Pacific area. 24 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 74. The mind is a problem-solving organ that allows us 75. A tendency to sleep at a set time each day defines to deal with events in imagination before they are an individual’s ‘chronotype’. Although strongly faced in reality. That amazing skill has, over the last influenced by genetics and light exposure, 10,000 years, allowed us, a weak, slow, and poorly age-related body changes play a key role. Puberty defended species, to take over the planet. ---- We are heralds a notable shift as bedtimes and wake-up living longer, even in the poorest countries. times get later. ---- By 55 we wake at around the time Violence is down, despite how things appear on our we did as young children, approximately two hours screens. We have made human progress. earlier than as adolescents. Thus, a 7 am alarm for a teenager feels like a 5 am start for a person in their A) Some of the real-world difficulties a person faced centuries ago have been taken care of or at least 50s. diminished. A) Teenagers need about 9 hours for best academic performance; however, many of them get far less. B) Still, choosing values takes a certain amount of psychological sophistication to rein in the B) This trend continues until 19.5 years in women and problem-solving mind. nearly 21 in men, then gradually reverses. C)When we engage the capacity to choose and to C)A Canadian study compared cognitive performance embrace the values that inform our actions, we are mid-morning and mid-afternoon in teenagers and humanising ourselves. adults. D)Our mental capacity can serve as an ever-present D)Not surprisingly, teachers in their 50s will generally be compass, letting us know we are straying from our true at their best in the morning, unlike their teenage purpose. students. E) Sometimes we get so caught up in our own thinking E) More relaxed attitudes to bedtimes, ignorance about that we risk turning our values into a pros-and-cons sleep and the near addictive use of social media make list. this worse. 25 2020-YDS/1/ENGLISH 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 78. (I) Some of the most common reasons for early sentence in the passage. childhood hearing loss are genetic. (II) Inner ear hair cells are responsible for detecting sound signals and sending them to the brain, but gene mutations within 76. (I) Wagner was a musical innovator who revolutionised those cells lead to poorly functioning anatomy. opera by creating vast music-dramas for which he wrote (III) Researchers working with mice have devised a both the music and the words – previously composers method for replacing those flawed genes with healthy had used stories written by librettists. (II) He wanted to versions: they put the healthy genes into a modified create a combination of all the arts – music, poetry, virus and inject it into the inner ear. (IV) The main test of drama, and painting – which he called a restored ear function involves exposing the rodents to a Gesamtkunstwerk. (III) In addition, each major character, sudden, startling noise to see if they jump. (V) When the bol, or place in his dramas had its individual musical virus infects the ear hair cells, it delivers the healthy theme, or leitmotif, that accompanied it throughout the genes. opera. (IV) The greatest use of this technique came in A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V his Ring Cycle, an epic story told over four operas. (V) In his essay On Conducting, he proposed that a creative conductor should actively interpret music, rather than just control an orchestra like a traffic cop. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 79. (I) It is well documented in the literature that anxiety disorders often co-occur with other diagnoses, including depression and other anxiety disorders. (II) However, it is important to examine whether this is true for the elderly as well. (III) Unlike anxiety or depression, the 77. (I) In the late 15th century, when Europeans first incidence of cognitive impairment increases with age. travelled into the Western Hemisphere, Mesoamerica (IV) Research is beginning to shed light on the was dominated by the vast empire of the Aztecs. co-occurrence of depression and other psychiatric (II) Today, many people in both Mesoamerica and along disorders in older adults (V) There is evidence the Caribbean are of mixed background. (III) But within suggesting that as with younger adults, depression most decades of the European arrival, Spanish conquerors frequently co-occurs with anxiety disorders among had overwhelmed those powerful people and all other elderly patients. major groups. (IV) Native Aztec, Zapotec, Mixtec, and A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V others were congregated into European-style villages and towns and forcibly converted to Roman Catholicism. (V) However, Europeans also introduced them to new sources of income, making them no longer dependent on traditionally practiced agriculture. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 80. (I) In 2002, the Department of Experimental Psychology at Oxford University took a group of 50 insomniacs and got them to try different ways to fall asleep. (II) Those using the traditional sheep-counting method took slightly longer than the average. (III) Some sleep research seems to suggest that punctuating long working hours with brief ‘power naps’ of just a few minutes may be good for health. (IV) What worked best was imagining a tranquil scene such as a beach or a waterfall: this relaxes people and engages their imagination. (V) On the other hand, counting sheep is too boring or irritating to take your mind off whatever is keeping you awake. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V END OF THE TEST 26 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS 2020 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 1 2020 - YDS/1 27-09-2020 1. A 48. A 2. B 49. A 3. B 50. C 4. A 51. A 5. D 52. C 6. E 53. B 7. C 54. C 8. B 55. B 9. C 56. C 10. A 57. B 11. D 58. C 12. A 59. D 13. E 60. B 14. C 61. C 15. E 62. D 16. B 63. B 17. D 64. E 18. B 65. B 19. D 66. A 20. A 67. B 21. C 68. A 22. B 69. E 23. B 70. A 24. E 71. B 25. B 72. A 26. D 73. A 27. E 74. A 28. E 75. B 29. E 76. E 30. A 77. B 31. B 78. D 32. A 79. C 33. C 80. C 34. B 35. C 36. A 37. A 38. A 39. B 40. C 41. A 42. A 43. A 44. C 45. B 46. D 47. C T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (2021-YDS/1) İNGİLİZCE 18 NİSAN 2021 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. Since the mid-20th century, plastic pollution has expression to fill the space. increased ----, and resulting pollution has become a global environmental issue. A)exponentially B)conveniently 1. The most powerful ---- to parachuting is fear, but one should also take its high cost into account, as a C)alternatively D)precisely total outfit for parachuting can be extremely expensive. E)fruitfully A)resemblance B)adjustment C)deterrent D)submission E)adherence 5. The most basic path to computer literacy is to ---- competence in using computers to perform personal or vocational tasks. A)exclude B)relieve 2. Peanut may very well be the most common food C)deteriorate D)restrict allergy in some populations, but the ---- of a particular food allergy varies according to age and E)attain group. A)utilisation B)withdrawal C)precaution D)termination E)prevalence 6. Making videos should be a lot of fun, but it can also be a bit of a minefield, as lots of people ---- problems and lose momentum before they even get started. A)hand over B)look for 3. Heating and cooling of the Earth are not ----, as it C)turn down D)give up takes time for land, water, and air to either absorb heat and warm up or release stored heat and cool E)run into down. A)hospitable B)convertible C)instantaneous D)detrimental E)preliminary 1 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. The recent discovery of a toe made of wood and word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). leather ---- to the mummified body of an Egyptian noblewoman in Cairo, approximately 3,000 years old, ---- that artificial limbs are nothing new. 7. A seminal study ---- that people who ---- less than A) attached / proves seven hours a night are at increased risk of mortality. B) being attached / had proven A) revealed / will sleep C)attach / has proven B) has revealed / sleep D)attaching / proved C)reveals / will be sleeping E) to be attached / used to prove D)will reveal / have slept E) had revealed / had been sleeping 10. Anorexia nervosa is a severe eating disorder, usually involving excessive weight loss ---- self-starvation, most often found ---- teenage girls. 8. Ideally, the end of the Cold War between the United A)at / with B)from / of States and the Soviet Union ---- a substantial lessening of security concerns in the world; C)for / between D)by / on however, in practice, the focus ---- to terrorism and subnational groups. E)through / among A) might have signified / will have moved B) would have signified / used to move C)must have signified / had moved D)could have signified / had been moving 11. With concerns ---- the rate of energy demand, the E) should have signified / moved role of renewable energy, which is generated ---- sources that are naturally replenished, such as wind and sunlight, is becoming increasingly significant. A)at / upon B)in / for C)to / through D)about / from E)over / into 2 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 12. ---- certain types of fungi have been used throughout 15. The conventional view of dinosaur origins holds that history for a variety of beneficial purposes, others they were endowed with ---- superior speed, agility, have been found to contain dangerous toxins that metabolism and intelligence ---- as soon as they are poisonous to humans. debuted they quickly spread across the globe. A)Once B)Although A)either / or B)both / and C)Since D)Provided that C)the more / the more D)whether / or E)Only when E)such / that 13. ---- such an intimate connection existed between 16. Books continue to be a major medium for agricultural intensification and the appearance of communicating scholarly works in the field of cities, it is not surprising that the earliest evidence history, ---- many other social sciences, where for cities comes from regions with ancient journal articles are far more important. agricultural traditions. A)with the help of B)in contrast to A)Because B)As if C)due to D)such as C)Before D)Although E)on the basis of E)While 14. ---- children can be easy targets for exploitation and victimization, supervision is a necessary component of any Internet safety. A)Even if B)Although C)Since D)Before E)Unless 3 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19. passage. A)withdrew B)neglected According to classical Western historiography, C)jeopardised D)dispelled modernity begins in 1789 with the advent of the French Revolution. This is, perhaps, not entirely (17)----the E)adopted many social changes inspired by that upheaval. It is also because of the political change, marking the break between the former regime and modernity (18)----the French Revolution represents the beginning of modern political culture. Between 1791 and 1795, France (19)----three constitutions. These were a liberal constitutional monarchy, a democratic republic based on universal manhood suffrage and a liberal republic. All three provided inspiration for constitutional monarchists, 20. democrats and liberals far (20)----the borders of France. A)beyond B)under Indeed, the legacy of the 1791 constitution eventually forced most ruling 19th-century monarchs (21)----a C)between D)by constitution limiting their powers. And of the 29 constitutions adopted in Europe during 1791 – 1802 E)into alone, 26 were the result of direct French influence. 17. 21. A) having accepted A)unlike B)despite B) to have accepted C)due to D)instead of C)accepting E)except for D)to accept E) to be accepting 18. A)as if B)because C)although D)once E)unless 4 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)for B)at Martin Scorsese’s Goodfellas (1990) is a long, violent C)in D)to and enthralling interweaving of biography, social observation and black comedy. It is a story based on the E)on real life of Henry Hill, who grew to manhood in the Mafia and eventually (22)---- his former associates, sending them to prison for the rest of their lives. The film is considered to be successful by critics and audiences (23)---- its superb cast, which includes some of the best of New York’s character actors: Paul Sorvino, Lorraine Bracco as Hill’s wife, Robert De Niro in his sixth collaboration with director Scorsese, and Joe Pesci, who gives a remarkably realistic performance as a 25. menacing gangster (24)---- the rise. As Henry Hill, the A) to gain actor Ray Liotta gives a complex portrayal of an Irish-Italian kid who succeeds in his youthful ambition B) gaining (25)---- popularity as a wealthy gangster, only to have his position slowly eroded until it almost destroys him. C)to have gained Martin Scorsese sustains the fast tempo of the tale to an exciting, artful climax, (26)----some questioned whether Goodfellas glamorised or made criminals appear too D)having gained pathetic. E) to be gaining 22. A)executed B)recalled 26. C)converted D)anticipated A)given that B)only when E)betrayed C)even though D)as long as E)as if 23. A)at the expense of B)as opposed to C)on account of D)except for E)in comparison to 5 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. ----, advertisers will quickly be discouraged from option to complete the given sentence. attempting to use such approaches because of public disapproval. A) Even if a successful return on investment is 27. Unless they regard the material they are taught as forthcoming from subliminal advertisements worth learning, ----. A) classrooms are rather intricate microcosms where B) Because companies desire high profits from their students spend a great deal of their life and find out investments, including advertising who they are C)As a result of a rapid growth in online advertising in B) time pressure under which most teachers work many sectors prevents them from meeting their students’ needs D)Whereas there is no credible evidence that subliminal C)students will not be motivated to take part in advertising will yield benefits classroom activities and interact with each other E) Although proponents provide no rationale to guide D)subjects related to students’ everyday experiences the use of subliminal adverts stimulate their interest and induce them to study with vigour E) making learning process more enjoyable and interesting encourages further student involvement 30. In addition to the obvious detrimental effects of sport injury on physical functioning, ----. A) athletes are mainly able to focus primary attention on their rehabilitation programs 28. While chronic stress can bring on significant mental B) any injury that occurs during a sports event is called a health issues along with other problems, ----. sport injury A) stress can be prevented from becoming a problem in the first place by following a healthy diet C)most negative emotions tend to dissipate over the first month following the injuries B) employees should be trained in stress management before they experience stress-related problems in the D)sport injury can have a harmful effect on various workplace aspects of psychological functioning C)work-related stress often leads to depression or E) injury appears to spur athletes’ use of coping anxiety, causing a high rate of loss in employee strategies and seeking support from others productivity D)short-term stress, such as working to meet an imminent deadline, can be beneficial E) stress may trigger headaches, digestive disorders and cardiovascular disease 6 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 31. Even though Egyptian medicine went into decline 33. The many varieties of lime are nearly identical in about 1200 BCE, ----. shape and appearance, ----. A) ancient Egyptians began to develop the world’s first A) while their primary use is to flavour foods like salads sophisticated medical practice sometime before 2000 and cakes BCE B) although they are widely considered to have originated B) its reputation as the best in the ancient world in Asia continued for many centuries to follow C)given that they are high in vitamin C and contain C)there is evidence suggesting that most treatments for antioxidants that promote health disease were based on trial-and-error experimentation D)but their degree of acidity ranges from nearly neutral D)it is assumed that Egyptian priests gained their to extremely sour understanding of the human body by preparing mummies E) so they can also be utilised to produce perfumes and suntan products E) religion in ancient Egypt played an integral role in the treatment of all kinds of diseases 34. Consumers are less likely to adopt innovations that demand radical behaviour changes ----. 32. Visiting buildings gives you the best chance to A) as certain habits are more likely to be rapidly adopted experience architecture in relation to the world of light, sound, setting, and people, ----. B) unless they are convinced that the effort will be A) though visits to buildings are enjoyable and provide a worthwhile chance to see how architecture changes the real world C)although innovators represent about 2.5% of the B) but to understand the underlying architecture of population buildings you need to study them through drawing D)whereas marketers are interested in identifying C)as many books on architecture and the history of producers’ needs architecture are rich in various kinds of visuals E) since they tend to have more favourable attitudes D)and there is no readily-available prescription on how to toward taking risks become a good architect E) even so, architecture is about changing the world, making it better, more comfortable, and more beautiful 7 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. Irish people fear that international populations of English, and the most accurate English translation Ireland’s cities threaten the native culture, ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) as cultural education is mandatory for all permanent residents of Ireland 37. One of the difficulties of studying African literature B) yet Irish artists are encouraged to focus on traditional is that for much of the history of Africa, the societies rather than modern art projects were non-literate and thus relied on oral traditions to pass their stories to the coming generations. C)and thus foreigners seeking good job opportunities A) Afrika edebiyatını incelemenin zorluklarından biri, stay in big cities like Dublin and Belfast Afrika tarihinin büyük bir bölümünde toplumların okuryazar olmamalarından dolayı hikâyelerini gelecek D)but the survival of traditional music, dance, and nesillere sözlü gelenek yoluyla aktarmayı tercih storytelling proves otherwise etmeleridir. E) so Ireland’s popularity as a tourist destination is B) Afrika tarihinin büyük bir bölümünde toplumların ensured by its profound cultural heritage okuryazar olmamaları sebebiyle hikâyelerini gelecek nesillere aktarmak için sözlü geleneklere bağlı kalması, Afrika edebiyatını incelemenin zorluklarından birini oluşturmaktadır. C)Afrika edebiyatını incelerken karşılaşılan zorluklardan biri, Afrika tarihinin büyük bir bölümüne bakıldığında toplumların okuryazar olmamaları ve hikâyelerini 36. Esperanto, an artificial language invented in 1887 gelecek nesillere sözlü geleneklere bağlı kalarak aktarmalarıdır. for international use, is considered by many to be one of the easiest languages to master ----. D)Afrika edebiyatını incelemenin zorluklarından biri, A) but UNESCO has affirmed the value of establishing Afrika tarihinin büyük bir bölümünde toplumların it as a universal second language okuryazar olmamaları ve dolayısıyla hikâyelerini gelecek nesillere aktarmak için sözlü geleneklere bağlı B) although the Polish linguist Ludwik L. Zamenhof hoped kalmalarıdır. to bring all of the peoples of the Earth together by inventing such a language E) Afrika tarihinin büyük bir bölümünde toplumlar okuryazar olmadıklarından hikâyelerini gelecek C)in order that the number of speakers can reach nesillere aktarmak için sözlü geleneklere bağlıydılar ve several million in varying levels of proficiency bu durum Afrika edebiyatını incelemenin zorluklarından birini oluşturmaktadır. D)because it is known for its simplicity, beauty and flexibility as a medium for translation E) even if Esperantists believe in the positive outcomes in learning and teaching this language 8 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 38. Being overweight after turning 60 may increase the 39. As well as being low in calories, vegetables are a risk of Alzheimer’s disease, but by losing weight, rich source of vitamins and minerals and can help people may be able to hinder ageing of their brains reduce the risk of many health problems. and reduce the likelihood of memory problems later A) Zengin bir vitamin ve mineral kaynağı olan sebzeler on. aynı zamanda düşük kalorili olduğu için birçok sağlık A) Aşırı kilolu olmak, 60 yaşına gelindiğinde Alzheimer sorunu riskinin azaltılmasına yardımcı olabilir. hastalığı riskini artırabilmektedir fakat kilo veren B) Sebzeler, düşük kalorili olmakla birlikte zengin insanlar beyinlerinin yaşlanmasını engelleyerek bir vitamin ve mineral kaynağı olduğu için birçok sağlık sonrasında yaşanacak olan hafıza problemleri sorunu riskinin azaltılmasına yardımcı olur. olasılığını azaltabilirler. C)Düşük kalorili olmalarının yanı sıra sebzeler, zengin bir B) 60 yaşından sonra aşırı kilolu olmak, Alzheimer vitamin ve mineral kaynağıdır ve pek çok sağlık hastalığı riskini artırabilir ancak kilo vererek sorunu riskinin azaltılmasına yardımcı olabilir. beyinlerinin yaşlanmasının önüne geçebilen insanlar sonrasında yaşanacak olan hafıza problemleri D)Pek çok sağlık sorunu riskinin azaltılmasına yardımcı olasılığını azaltabilirler. olan sebzeler, zengin bir vitamin ve mineral kaynağı olmakla birlikte düşük kalorilidir. C)60 yaşına geldikten sonra aşırı kilolu olanlar, Alzheimer hastalığı riskini artırabilmektedir fakat E) Sebzeler sadece düşük kalorili olmakla kalmayıp aynı insanlar kilo vererek beynin yaşlanmasının önüne zamanda zengin bir vitamin ve mineral kaynağıdır ve geçtiğinde sonrasında yaşanacak olan hafıza birçok sağlık sorunu riskinin azaltılmasına yardımcı problemleri olasılığını azaltabilirler. olmaktadır. D)60 yaşına geldikten sonra aşırı kilolu olmak, Alzheimer hastalığı riskini artırabilir ancak insanlar kilo vererek beyinlerinin yaşlanmasının önüne geçebilir ve sonrasında hafıza problemleri yaşama olasılığını azaltabilirler. E) 60 yaş sonrası kilolu olmak, Alzheimer hastalığı riskini artırsa da insanlar beyinlerinin yaşlanmasını engellemek ve sonrasında hafıza problemleri yaşama olasılığını azaltmak için kilo verebilirler. 9 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 40. Birinci Dünya Savaşı’ndan sonra Avrupa otomobil 41. Önemli gelişmelere rağmen beynin tam olarak nasıl endüstrisi yavaş yavaş toparlanmaya başladı ancak hesap yaptığı hâlâ çözülmemiş bir problemdir, nispeten düşük gelirler ve yüksek işletme maliyetleri çünkü nöronların bilgiyi nasıl kodladığıyla ilgili pek gerçek anlamda bir seri otomobil üretiminin ortaya çok soru henüz cevaplanmamıştır. çıkmasını engelledi. A) The reason why there are still many unanswered A) It was comparatively low incomes and high operating questions about how neurons code information in spite costs that hindered the emergence of a real mass of significant progress is that the problem of exactly production of automobiles although the European how the brain computes has not been solved yet. automobile industry started to make gradual progress B) In spite of considerable progress, the problem of after World War I. exactly how the brain can compute remains to be unsolved, as there are many unanswered questions B) Following World War I, the European automobile about the way neurons code information. industry started to improve gradually; however, the factors that hindered the emergence of a real mass C)Despite considerable progress, exactly how the brain production of automobiles were relatively low incomes computes remains an unsolved problem because and high operating costs. many questions about how neurons code information have not been answered yet. C)Whereas the European automobile industry began to recover slowly following World War I, the emergence D)There has been considerable progress, but many of a real mass production of automobiles was delayed questions about exactly how neurons code information because of relatively low incomes and high operating remain unanswered, so the problem of how the brain costs. can compute has not been solved yet. D)The European automobile industry started to recover E) While there has been significant progress, we still slowly after World War I, but relatively low incomes cannot solve the problem of exactly how the brain and high operating costs prevented the emergence of computes, as many questions about how neurons a real mass production of automobiles. code information have not been answered yet. E) Having started to improve gradually after World War I, the European automobile industry prevented the emergence of a real mass production of automobiles due to comparatively low incomes and high operating costs. 10 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 42. İki farklı bakteri türü, insan vücudunun belirli bölgelerinde karşılaştıklarında antibiyotiklere karşı gösterdikleri alışılagelmiş tepkilerini bırakarak beklenmedik bir şekilde davranabilirler. A) Two different types of bacteria are likely to act unpredictably when they meet in certain parts of the human body and abandon their usual responses to antibiotics. B) When two different types of bacteria meet in certain parts of the human body, they can act unexpectedly, abandoning their typical responses to antibiotics. C)When two different types of bacteria meet in certain parts of the human body, abandoning their typical responses to antibiotics can make them act unexpectedly. D)The human body has certain parts where two different types of bacteria may act unpredictably when they meet and abandon their typical responses to antibiotics. E) Meeting in certain parts of the human body, two different types of bacteria can act unexpectedly if they have abandoned their normal responses to antibiotics. 11 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. According to the passage, human exceptionalism is based on ----. A) evidence that apes have the ability to learn a human The question of animal language and thought has been language debated since ancient times. Some have held the view that humans are exceptional in these respects, B) the fact that apes are able to think just like humans do while others believe that humans and animals are similar with respect to language and thought. The issue C)the assumption that animal behaviour is closely is important because our self-image as a species is at connected to their thoughts stake. Arguments for human exceptionalism such as Cartesian, Wittgensteinian and behaviourist state that D)an idea that there is a strong link between language language and thought are closely associated, and and thought animals do not have language. The ape language experiments of the 1960s and 1970s were especially E) a behaviourist approach to language learning important against this background: if apes could learn language then even the advocates of human exceptionalism would have to admit that they have thoughts. It is now generally believed that whatever linguistic abilities apes have shown have been quite rudimentary. Yet many sceptics are willing to grant that in some cases apes did develop linguistic skills to some 45. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. extent, and clearly evidenced thought. Studies of other A) captive and wild animals differ greatly in how they animals in captivity and various animals in the wild have communicate provided evidence of highly sophisticated communicative behaviour. Cognitive ethology and B) wild animals are better at developing ways of comparative psychology have emerged as the fields that communication than captive animals study animal thought. While there are conceptual difficulties in grounding these fields, it appears plausible C)there is a significant lack of study of animal thought that many animals have thoughts and these can be and communication scientifically investigated. D)studies of animals in captivity fail to provide any evidence of their ability to think E) whether captive or wild, many animals may exhibit sophisticated communicational behaviour 43. According to the passage, the issue of animal language is significant because ----. A) it has just started to emerge in various debates B) it can determine the self-image of human beings as a species 46. Which of the following can be said about the author C)it has been proven that animals can understand of the passage? human language A) He seems to be of the opinion that there are many animals with the ability to think. D)human beings’ self-image is strengthened when animals understand their language B) He supports the philosophical views that regard humans as the highest of species. E) there is strong evidence against animals’ ability to have thoughts C)He clearly states that investigating animal intelligence in terms of thinking is a waste of time. D)He does not accept the idea that humans and animals can be investigated on one scale. E) He endorses the idea that human beings’ self-image as a species has been destroyed. 12 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. According to the passage, the success of small businesses is often associated with ----. A) diversification of risk Risk is inherent in all business activity. Start-ups, for example, face the risk of too few customers, and B) a specific idea or location therefore insufficient revenue to cover costs. There is also the risk that a competitor will copy the company’s C)operating in several markets idea, and perhaps offer a better alternative. When a company has borrowed money from a bank, there is a D)their position relative to inherent risks risk that interest rates will rise, and repayments will become too burdensome to afford. Start-ups that rely on E) revising their targets overseas trade are also exposed to exchange-rate risk. Moreover, new businesses in particular may be exposed to the risk of operating in only one market. Whereas large companies often diversify their operations to spread risk, the success of small companies is often linked to the success of one idea (the original genesis for the start-up) or one geographic region, such as the local area. A decline in that market or area can lead to 49. What is the author’s attitude towards risk-taking? failure. It is essential that new businesses are mindful of A)Cautious B)Supportive market changes, and position themselves to adapt to those changes. At its heart, risk is a strategic issue. C)Neutral D)Changeable Business owners must carefully weigh the operational risk of a start-up, or the risks of a new product or E)Tolerant project, against potential profits or losses – in other words, the strategic consequences of action vs. inaction. Risk must be quantified and managed; and it poses a constant strategic challenge. Fortune favours the brave, but with people’s lives and the success of the business at stake, caution cannot simply be thrown to the wind. 50. Which of the following describes the main purpose of this passage? A) To warn businesses against the risks that are a natural part of doing business 47. Which of the following is not mentioned as a risk in B) To discourage start-ups from doing business with business activity? overseas companies A) Not having enough customers to meet the costs of C)To show that risks in business far outweigh any operating your business possible advantages B) A competitor offering a better version of your product D)To explain why risk-taking in business is essential in certain business models C)Not being able to get a bank loan to cover your start-up costs E) To describe how risk-taking contributes to success in business D)Exchange-rate risk in overseas trade E) Challenge of loan repayment if interest rates increase 13 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. It is stated in the passage that the hand bones of Neanderthals ----. A) were chunkier than those of early modern humans Neanderthals could hold objects between finger and allowing only power grips thumb like we would hold a pen because their hands were more nimble, able to move quickly and easily. B) were previously considered to make them incapable of Recent findings suggest that Neanderthals were able to performing delicate tasks perform skilful tasks like threading sea shells onto string to make jewellery. These activities were hard to explain C)helped them to excel in using string to make jewellery if they were clumsy. Neanderthal hand bones were from various materials much chunkier than ours, implying a lack of fine control. Previous studies suggested Neanderthals were unable D)led to a lack of control while using power grips to to perform a ‘precision grip’ with finger and thumb. perform different jobs Instead, they were thought to use a ‘power E) were not well developed enough to study them through grip’ involving their whole fist like small children holding 3D scans crayons. To find out how Neanderthals used their hands, Katerina Harvati at the University of Tübingen, Germany studied 3D scans of ‘entheses’: the points on the bones where muscles were attached. A precision grip uses a different set of muscles to a power grip, and those muscles that get used more result in larger entheses. Harvati’s team previously showed this by studying modern humans having done different jobs. 53. The underlined word ‘reconciles’ is closest in They examined the hand entheses of Neanderthals and meaning to ----. early modern humans. The Neanderthals spent most of A)challenges B)divides their time using precision grips, while the early modern humans used both precision and power grips. “Our C)matches D)identifies study reconciles the archaeological with the anatomical fossil evidence,” says Harvati. “It was previously E)abandons proposed Neanderthals relied on force for their manual activities”, but this perception “was at odds with mounting archaeological evidence for sophisticated cultural behaviour of Neanderthals”. 54. Which of the following could be the best title for the passage? 51. It is stated in the passage that contrary to earlier A) Effects of the Power Grip on Cultural Behaviours research, Neanderthals ----. of Neanderthals A) were capable of using their finger and thumb to grasp things B) Historical Records of Manual Activities of Neanderthals B) expended considerable effort to be able to perform a precision grip C)A Comparison between Neanderthal and Modern Human Hand Anatomies C)learnt to control their hand muscles through activities like making jewellery with sea shells D)Archaeological Findings on Early Modern Humans’ Manual Skills D)were clumsy, and thus incompetent in accomplishing complicated tasks E) Neanderthal Performance: Power Grip or Precision Grip E) used power grips even for tasks that required delicacy 14 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. According to the passage, the safety of each flight is ensured by ----. A) supplying powerful engines US statistics taken from between 2000 and 2009 show that car drivers or passengers suffer 7.3 deaths per B) having skilled aircraft crew billion miles. In contrast, air travel comes in at just 0.07 deaths per billion passenger miles. Of course, statistics C)the tests before the flights cannot cure someone’s fear of flying, but they do prove that it is one of the safest ways to get from A to B. This D)less traffic in the air safety is thanks to the testing that every single part of the aircraft has to go through before it is allowed to E) having fewer passengers undertake its first flight. While passengers get to enjoy the comfort of air conditioning, the engines have to be able to cope with temperatures as low as -55 ºC during cruise conditions. Temperature tests are important to the airlines because they want to make sure that their planes can operate in as many environments as possible. Each time they have to ground an aircraft because of bad weather, they lose money. Another thing 57. According to the passage, temperature is important to be considered by the airlines is the migrating birds. in air travel because ----. They can travel at altitudes of over 8,000m and threaten A) bad weather conditions can result in loss of money for the cruise phase of the flight, although the greatest risk the airlines is during take-off, when the craft is at its heaviest and the engines are close to maximum power. B) temperatures as low as -55 ºC are the main cause of plane crashes C)the air conditioning in aircrafts is not effective at low temperatures 55. It is pointed out in the passage that according to the D)it can affect the speed of the planes leading to delays statistics ----. in flights A) air travel is more popular than ever, especially in the E) passengers generally prefer to fly in good weather USA conditions B) the number of people afraid of air travel is increasing C)transportation is safer by plane than by car D)the number of deaths in air travel is increasing 58. One can understand from the passage that birds ----. E) people die of the fear of flights, not of air crashes A) are responsible for the majority of air travel deaths B) are a bigger danger to planes than low temperatures C)threaten the safety of the flight mostly during the initial stages of the flight D)can prevent the engines from reaching their maximum power E) are most dangerous at altitudes higher than 8,000m 15 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. It is pointed out in the passage that weak memories ----. A) can be strengthened but they cannot be as permanent What makes for a long-lasting memory? Research has as initially strong ones shown that emotional or important events become deeply rooted, whereas neutral ones create weak B) remain in the brain only if they are replicated on a daily impressions that easily fade. But what about an basis experience that initially seemed forgettable but was later shown to be important? Animal research suggested that C)can be better remembered if they are connected to these types of older memories could be strengthened, initially strong ones but until now scientists had not been able to replicate these findings in humans. New evidence suggests that D)are bound to disappear eventually, even if they are our initially weak memories are maintained by the brain repeated for a set period of time, during which they can be E) are kept in the brain for some time before they are enhanced. In a recent study, psychologists at New York forgotten University showed 119 participants a set of images of tools and animals. A few minutes later the subjects saw a new set of images, with an electric shock paired with either tools or animals to increase the salience of one category. The participants' memories for both sets of images were then tested either six hours later, or the next day. Participants remembered images from the first series better if they belonged to the same category that 61. Which of the following is true about the study done was later paired with a shock. The findings suggest that by New York University psychologists? even if an event does not seem meaningful when it A) Accompanying an image in the second set with an occurs, a later cue signalling that the experience was electric shock facilitated recollection of the ones in the important can enhance the old memory. same category in the first set. B) The participants remembered as many images from the second series as from the first one when asked on the same day or the next day. 59. According to the passage, in order for memories to C)The memory experiment tested humans' neural be deeply rooted, they should be ----. reactions to a set of images of animals and tools. A) paired with a physical stimulus D)The study provided evidence for how memories can be manipulated to alter reality. B) accompanied by stimulating feelings E) The researchers accompanied the images of tools with C)linked to the ones that are initially strong an electric shock to make the tool category distinct. D)broadly categorised in the brain before they are lost E) replicated immediately after they are created 62. What does the passage mainly focus on? A) How new experiences boost initially weak memories B) How humans react psychologically to different images C)When a memory is susceptible to weakening D)What types of feedback can strengthen memories E) Whether positive outcomes improve long-term memory 16 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Jeff: option to complete the dialogue.  The scale of natural catastrophes in the world reveals that something must be done as soon as possible. Just consider the fire in 63. Daniel: Australia in 2019.  In my Humanities course this week, we’re learning about common American hobbies. One such Amy: hobby is coin collecting.  ---- Beth: Jeff:  That sounds strange and uncommon. Why would  Neither. Actually, a more viable solution would be someone have a hobby such as coin collecting? better. Daniel: Amy:  ----  Well, I completely agree that urgent precautions are needed. Beth: A) Can you please be more specific or at least give some  Well, it’s true that coins represent changes in clear examples as to how? trade as well as in international relations. However, it still seems like a strange hobby to B) What are the two major actions you consider should me. be taken on this matter at hand? A) I’m not sure why someone would have a hobby like this. Perhaps people with large collections feel more C)Governments have neither action nor contingency powerful than those without. plans for such a gravely important issue, don’t you think? B) Some would argue that coin collecting is related to history and economics. Therefore, this hobby covers a D)Do you mean harsh penalties or increasing ecological wide range of interests. taxes? C)My father grew up in America and he collected coins E) I believe that more efforts should be made to increase because he wanted to learn about metals. public awareness of natural catastrophes. Would you agree? D)The reasons behind our hobbies are sometimes unexplainable. I do know that people appreciate money, so that could be why. E) Our professor asked us that same question. I’m going to think about possible reasons this week. 17 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 65. Hannah: 66. Elizabeth:  The weather has finally warmed up! Time to bring  Did you know that the rise of drug-resistant out the spring wardrobe! bacteria due to overprescription of antibiotics kills nearly one million people a year around the Michael: world?  You’re right, but for many of us that means the onset of allergies with sniffles and watery eyes. Philip:  ---- Hannah:  ---- Elizabeth:  To address this, the UK government offered local Michael: health bodies an extra £5 in funding per patient if  Actually a healthy diet is said to be the key. What they cut prescribing antibiotics. we eat has the potential to prevent allergic reactions, like sneezing, from happening in the Philip: first place.  Did it really work? Hannah: Elizabeth:  That’s great! Then everybody can find a way to  Well, one study has found that general enjoy outdoors in spring. practitioners began writing 3% fewer antibiotic A) What other ptoms do people have when their prescriptions for respiratory infections. spring allergy starts? A) Some family doctors in Australia and the UK use tests before they prescribe antibiotics. B) Which allergens should people watch out for during spring time? B) Yeah that’s right, and many doctors unnecessarily prescribe the drugs for viral infections as well. C)Why don’t people prefer to stay indoors to deal with spring allergies? C)Fortunately, doctors have been successfully nudged to cut antibiotic use in recent years. D)How can people avoid allergies especially throughout spring? D)To be honest, governments should try raising patients´ awareness rather than interfering with the E) How long are allergic people allowed to stay out when doctor’s business. it is spring? E) I heard that an initiative to curb the overuse of antibiotics was introduced, which dramatically lowered the rates. 18 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Student: rephrased form of the given sentence.  I think for my final presentation I'm going to focus on culture and the characteristics of cultured people. 68. Although it is incorrect to characterise adolescence Teacher: as a time of inevitable family conflict, early  ---- adolescence is a period of significant change in family relationships. Student: A) Early adolescence is a period of serious change in  Well I like the topic because how people interpret family relationships, so it may be wrongly considered it may vary greatly. To some, being cultured as a time when frequent disagreements arise in the means being cultured in arts while for others it family. only refers to a good education. B) Early adolescence refers to a period of substantial Teacher: change in family relationships; however, it would be  I see your point now. Then, you will also need to wrong to characterise adolescence as a time when address how complementary these two views are unavoidable family disputes occur. to each other. C)As adolescence is a time when inescapable family A) Wouldn’t it be better if you also mention the arguments break out, early adolescence is mistakenly mainstream culture in different societies to illustrate believed to result in critical change in family the common features of cultured people? relationships. B) Why do you consider it as an issue worth discussing in D)Whereas early adolescence is regarded as a period detail? Isn’t it clear what we expect to find in during which family relationships undergo remarkable these people? change, adolescence is incorrectly considered as a time when family disputes become more intense. C)Are you also interested in the definition of cultural events since it may provide clues about who to E) Even though early adolescence is incorrectly include as cultured or not? characterised as a period of dramatic change in family D)Do you find cultured people who attend talks, relationships, adolescence is generally seen as a time exhibitions and music concerts more intriguing than when unavoidable family arguments occur frequently. ordinary ones? E) What about also comparing the description of cultured people with those of intellectuals, artists, and literary figures? 19 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 69. If the benefits of zoos are negligible, animal 71. Neuroscientists know a lot about how individual advocates contend, then, keeping wildlife captive neurons operate but remarkably little about how cannot be justified. large numbers of them work together to produce thoughts, feelings and behaviours. A) According to animal advocates, keeping wildlife captive is not justifiable even though zoos have A) Neuroscientists’ comprehensive understanding of the several benefits. workings of individual neurons may contribute significantly to what they know about large numbers of B) Despite the proven benefits of zoos, animal advocates neurons, which are thought to work in cooperation to believe that keeping wildlife captive is not justifiable. produce thoughts, feelings and behaviours. C)Animal advocates think that it is not possible to justify B) As they already know how neurons behave keeping wildlife captive unless there are significant individually, what neuroscientists need to focus more benefits to be gained from the zoos. on is how large neuron groups collaborate to produce thoughts, feelings and behaviours. D)Animal advocates suggest that justifying the need to keep wildlife captive in zoos depends on how much C)Neuroscientists are knowledgeable enough about benefit they offer. how individual neurons function during the production of thought, feelings, and behaviours, but they know E) Regardless of the benefits of zoos, keeping wildlife little about how large numbers of neurons perform captive is unacceptable for animal advocates to justify. these duties. D)Neuroscientists’ knowledge of how large numbers of neurons cooperate for the production of thoughts, feelings and behaviours is rather limited despite the fact that they have vast knowledge of how individual neurons work. 70. Communicative development in the first year of E) Neuroscientists have already discovered enough about the functioning of individual neurons, and now all infants occurs in the same way, regardless of the they need to expand their knowledge of how complexity of the language being acquired. large neuron groups produce thoughts, feelings and A) While communicative development in the first year of behaviours. all infants takes place in a similar way, the complexity of the language being acquired may impact this development. B) The complexity of an infant’s language determines whether he or she can learn to communicate more easily than others in his or her first year. C)Although some infants have a language that is more complex than those of others, their communicative development in their first year could occur more quickly. D)No matter how complicated their language is, every infant goes through the same process of communicative development in their first year. E) The complexity of the language being acquired has nothing to do with the communicative development in the first year of an infant, though it seems to do so. 20 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 72-75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the 73. Infants can recognise the emotions of others, and passage. use this information when reacting to novel situations and people. As infants explore their world, they generally rely on the emotional 72. Sleep is a period of intense neurological activity, expressions of their mothers or caregivers to especially when we have dreams. ---- Many determine the safety or appropriateness of a researchers think that dreams could be an particular endeavour. ---- Are infants simply unintended consequence of these and other imitating their mother’s emotional responses, or do underlying neurological processes. Harvard they actually experience a change in mood purely psychiatrists propose that as brain circuits become from the expressive visual cues of the mother? active during the night, they trigger sensations, What is known, however, is that as infants explore emotions and memories, all of which are essentially their environment, their emotional responses to random. But our meaning-making brains still what they encounter are based on cues portrayed by assemble all of this underlying activity into a story, their mother or primary caregiver. often a strange or illogical one. A) During the second year, infants express emotions of A) One of its main functions may be to allow the brain to shame or embarrassment and pride, which are greatly consolidate and organise our memories. developed with the help of adults. B) Deciphering nocturnal bols may be enjoyable, but B) Parents, however, are one of the primary sources that in reality, it is much more complicated than it seems. socialise children to communicate emotional experience in culturally specific ways. C)Scientific theories are more sceptical than dream C)Some scientists claim that infants may fail to react to a dictionaries about how much dreams actually reveal. threat in an appropriate way because it is usually difficult for them to appreciate inputs. D)Dreaming has recently been seen as something that opens a window to the working of the mind. D)Although this process has been established by several studies, there is some debate about how infants do it. E) Dream interpretations seem relevant to our lives because they apply equally well to almost everybody. E) Most infants, on the other hand, pay close attention to the events that take place in their environment, particularly after the first month. 21 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 74. For centuries, people have bred microorganisms for 75. Striving to eat healthily can, ironically, become an the production of foods such as cheese and yogurt. unhealthy obsession. People with the condition Genetic technology takes this process a step further known as ‘orthorexia nervosa’ are fixated on by manipulating specific genes for practical consuming food in a way that they consider pure, applications in research, medicine, and agriculture. clean or healthy to the point where their well-being The manipulation of genes resulted in hundreds of suffers. They can, for example, become new products at the beginning of the 21st century. malnourished. ---- Some cut out entire food groups ---- The tools used by scientists in this process like fats or carbs. Orthorexia is not yet listed in include DNA-splitting enzymes and host organisms psychiatric manuals, but it is described in scientific including a range of bacteria. journals. A) Usually, one gene prevails over the other and is thus A) The term ‘orthorexia nervosa’, which refers to called the dominant gene that supresses the other. a pathological fixation on eating only healthy foods, was coined by Steven Bratman, a Colorado physician. B) Currently there are a number of technologies that use genetic engineering. B) Experts generally link orthorexia with perfectionism, dieting, obsessive-compulsive traits and mental health C)Genes are individual segments of DNA within struggles. chromosomes and are known to affect all human C)That is because, as the disorder progresses, patients traits. often become increasingly restrictive in what they will D)Reproduction entails a copy of a gene from the father eat. and a gene from the mother joining together. D)If people cannot deal with such problems in a proper way, then it could be of high importance for them to E) Genes from different species are often combined by talk to a mental health professional. inserting a gene from one organism into another. E) Interestingly, and in contrast to many other eating disorders, gender does not seem to reduce the risk of getting orthorexia. 22 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 78. (I) All human muscles contain both slow and fast fibres, sentence in the passage. but muscles differ in the percentage of each. (II) The percentage of each fibre type in a particular muscle also varies from person to person. (III) For example, in the 76. (I) Children, adolescents and adults sometimes fear the quadriceps muscles of the legs, most marathon runners challenge of sustained, formal speaking before large have about 80% slow fibres, whereas sprinters have groups. (II)Teachers can help reduce unrealistic fears about 60% fast fibres.(IV)It is unusual to find a runner by pointing out how common they are among people who competes equally well in both 100-m and 10,000-m and what to do about them in order to reduce such fears races; runners just seem to feel comfortable running by providing opportunities for students to practice alone races of particular lengths. (V) These differences, which or with one other student and then before increasingly are genetically determined, undoubtedly help account larger groups. (III)Thus, students can practice speaking for our differing athletic capabilities. in front of their peers who face the same situation A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V while presenting information, answering questions and holding group discussions. (IV)Students need to know how speakers differ from one another and how particular circumstances call for different forms of speech. (V) Practising oral presentation in these ways can lessen students’ anxieties while, at the same time, helping them to learn the subject matter of the lesson. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 79. (I) The Aztecs, who developed a great but short-lived civilisation in central Mexico, are descendants of a warlike tribe known as the Toltecs. (II) According to the Aztecs, their original homeland was an island in a lake called Aztlan, which means 'White Land'. (III) In the 10th century AD, the Toltecs built a great city called Tula to the north of what is now Mexico City. (IV) But only two and a half centuries later, in the middle of the 12th 77. (I) Whale sharks, Rhincodon typus, are the biggest fish century, the Toltecs were conquered by a nomadic tribe on Earth, reaching up to 20 metres long and called the Chicimeca. (V) After that, the Toltecs weighing up to 20 tonnes. (II) Despite their size, the dispersed in all directions, leaving a legacy of legends slow-moving giants are not dangerous to humans. and religious traditions that would become important (III) Whale sharks tend to cluster at various coastal elements of Aztec culture. areas, drawn by seasonal increases in prey, including A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V zooplankton blooms and fish spawning. (IV) Juveniles have been known to play with divers. (V)But humans are a threat to them, with the species considered endangered as numbers decline from fishing, accidental capture alongside other fish, and collisions with vessels. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 23 2021-YDS/1/ENGLISH 80. (I)Crocodiles and alligators are the biggest living reptiles. (II)A crocodile is specialised at hunting in the water.(III)Although they look rather like lizards, they are actually more closely related to birds, and to the giant dinosaurs that disappeared from the Earth about 66 million years ago.(IV)These creatures lived alongside the dinosaurs millions of years ago, and probably preyed on them using the same ambush tactics that modern saltwater crocodiles use to kill buffalo.(V)They have not changed much since then, because they have not needed to ─ they have always been perfectly adapted for their way of life. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 24 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS. 2021 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 1 2021 - YDS/1 18-04-2021 1. C 48. B 2. E 49. A 3. C 50. A 4. A 51. A 5. E 52. B 6. E 53. C 7. B 54. E 8. E 55. C 9. A 56. C 10. E 57. A 11. D 58. C 12. B 59. B 13. A 60. E 14. C 61. A 15. E 62. A 16. B 63. B 17. C 64. D 18. B 65. D 19. E 66. B 20. A 67. B 21. D 68. B 22. E 69. C 23. C 70. D 24. E 71. D 25. A 72. A 26. C 73. D 27. C 74. E 28. D 75. C 29. A 76. D 30. D 77. C 31. B 78. D 32. B 79. B 33. D 80. B 34. B 35. D 36. D 37. D 38. D 39. C 40. D 41. C 42. B 43. B 44. D 45. E 46. A 47. C T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS/2) İNGİLİZCE 8 EYLÜL 2019 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. Maps of the ocean are rare as the vastness and expression to fill the space. depth of the ocean make it ---- difficult to study. A)admirably B)notoriously 1. Research has found that the typical brain is a C)questionably D)properly ‘mosaic’ combining some features that are more common in males and some that appear more E)incidentally frequently in females, pointing to the ---- that human brains do not belong to two distinct types categorised by gender. A)violation B)conclusion C)development D)compulsion E)obstacle 5. Children with autism spectrum conditions often have trouble ---- the emotional states of people around them, struggling to distinguish a happy face from a sad one, for example. A)overcoming B)ignoring C)provoking D)identifying 2. Many scientists and research advocates contend E)improving that animal experiments are crucial for learning about basic biology and disease mechanisms, and are necessary for testing the ---- of new medicines. A)scarcity B)urgency C)ambiguity D)efficacy E)uniformity 6. Human accomplishments ---- our ability to acquire knowledge from others and to use that communal store of experience to devise novel solutions to life’s challenges . A)call off B)stem from 3. Because the functions and disturbances of smell C)bring down D)take out and taste are nearly ----, disturbances of one affect the other. E)figure out A)inconvenient B)unremarkable C)inexplicable D)unsophisticated E)inseparable Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. A tsunami damaged emergency generators that ---- word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). power to keep the nuclear reactors at Fukushima in Japan cool; however, the earthquake ---- to the tsunami also caused the cooling systems to fail. 7. For the first time, doctors ---- that temporarily A) should provide / to lead opening the protective barrier of the human brain ---- to boost the delivery of cancer medication to brain B) could have provided / to have led tumours. A) are showing / helped C)would have provided / leading B) have shown / helps D)must have provided / having led C)showed / is helping E) might provide / led D)will have shown / was helping E) will be showing / has been helping 10. ---- the 17th century, committed Anglicans produced a steady flow of religious and devotional literature that aimed to inspire holiness ---- readers. A)By / about B)During / through 8. The Martian atmosphere is so thin, and the planet’s temperature so low that liquid water ---- there, and if C)Throughout / among D)From / against it ever did in the past, conditions ---- very different. A) might not have existed / were to be E)Across / over B) could not exist / may be C)would not exist / can be D)cannot exist / must have been E) must not exist / should have been 11. The word adolescence is Latin ---- origin, derived from the verb adolescere, which means ‘to grow ---- adulthood’. A)through / on B)from / to C)at / beyond D)in / into E)with / over Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 12. ---- immigrants to North America's new colonies 15. Personality is ---- a crucial aspect of psychology ---- were primarily British in the 17th and 18th every main branch of psychological research has centuries, significant numbers of people of other attempted to contribute to the existing knowledge in nationalities also established a presence in the this area. Americas. A)such / that B)whether / or A)Because B)While C)as much / as D)the more / the more C)As long as D)Provided that E)neither / nor E)Once 16. Having a geopolitical significance ---- its unique 13. Not much had been accomplished with the aspect of dividing two continents, the Bosphorus phenomena of magnetism and static ---- the Chinese stands among distinguished landmarks of Istanbul. began to use the magnetic compass for navigation A)similar to B)thanks to around 1000 AD. A)in case B)while C)in place of D)in spite of C)until D)if E)contrary to E)as soon as 14. Liquid water covers more than two-thirds of the Blue Planet's surface, ---- exactly how it got there has always been puzzling. A)so B)instead C)but D)otherwise E)as Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 19. passage. A)leads B)exposes In 2015, the Australian Shark Attack File, kept by C)attributes D)dedicates researchers at Sydney’s Taronga Conservation Society, recorded 33 shark attacks in local waters, two of which E)conveys were fatal. Both deaths, (17)---- a series of close encounters in which no one was harmed, were clustered around the towns of Ballina and Byron Bay in New South Wales, one of the eastern states of Australia. (18)---- , in 2014 the total number of attacks was 23; in 2013, that figure stood at 14. “But the stats only tell part of the story,” says John West, curator of the Australian Shark Attack File. He (19)---- the rise in attacks not to a sudden change in shark behaviour but to the higher 20. number of surfers in the water. “For the last 60 years, A)were allowing B)have allowed wetsuits (20)---- people to spend more time in the water throughout the winter months, thus surfing in those C)had allowed D)used to allow conditions increases the risk,” says West. In addition, marine ecologist Dr. Daniel Bucher suggests that E)will be allowing rainfalls in the state’s north could be carrying food for fish from rivers (21)---- the ocean and attracting sharks. “Don’t swim if you know there are plenty of bait fish around,” Bucher advises. “Especially if they’re breaking the surface, as it usually means something is chasing them from below.” 21. A)with B)about C)for D)into E)upon 17. A)owing to B)on behalf of C)by means of D)with the aim of E)along with 18. A)Therefore B)That is C)Eventually D)For instance E)By comparison Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)regardless of B)in contrast with As early humans moved out of Africa and into colder C)similar to D)in terms of climates, they were confronted with the problem of keeping warm. Without a coat of hair to protect E)rather than themselves against harsh climatic conditions, they (22)---- an artificial means of retaining body heat in order to survive. From this basic need developed the rich and varied dress of the world’s peoples. As societies began to develop, many other factors (23)---- the specific dress of a region or a culture, including the relative affluence, class and hierarchy, migration, war, religion, and industrialisation. Historically, dress has provided people with a visual cue that helps them make predictions about a person (24)---- ethnicity, class, gender, 25. profession, economic status, and even place of origin. It A)over B)for C)at forms an important element in social and economic history and can be an excellent basis (25)---- the study of culture. Most cultures have particular dress for D)toward E)from ceremonial occasions and life celebrations. (26)----, dress holds a central role in ritual, social, and political life. 26. 22. A)Even so B)Instead A)might find B)should have found C)However D)Otherwise C)can find D)had to find E)Therefore E)would have found 23. A)blurred B)endured C)determined D)exhausted E)threatened Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. For a long time, punishment was viewed as a useful option to complete the given sentence. child-rearing tool, ----. A) since children seek role models who they can observe and imitate to learn complex social behaviours 27. As the Dakota tribes along the Minnesota River in the US were fed up with settlers flooding into their B) furthermore, it evokes strong negative feelings in a territory, ----. child that he or she relates to the person applying it A) they were less powerful and thus failed to defeat the settlers C)therefore, punishment draws attention to the negative behaviour rather than the desired alternative B) the settlers were determined to fight against the Dakota tribes D)yet, it is now recognised that it generally does not lead to the desired behavioural outcome for children C)they decided to respond with attacks to push the settlers off their reservation E) hence, parents punishing their children for an inappropriate action are not providing an example of D)the settlers reached an agreement on the territorial the correct behaviour issues with the Dakota tribes E) the new settlers of Dakota started a riot to rebel against the tribal chiefs 30. While each researcher has their own way of analysing and interpreting animal remains, ----. A) it must be remembered that sample size and preservation quality ultimately influence the outcome 28. Because we are bombarded with so much information and misinformation about what might B) animal remains aid in the interpretation of ancient cause cancer, ----. resource choices A) it is often hard to separate myth from reality C)it is fundamental to determine the locations and social complexity of archaeological sites B) it affects every one of us in the same way D)animal remains can be used to provide information C)the chance of being diagnosed is one in two about a variety of issues in the study of societies D)there are some things we can do to reduce our risk of E) some methods, terms and analytical tools are getting cancer considered standard E) the extent of public confusion was exposed in a survey last year Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 31. Even though animal behaviourists have traditionally 33. ----, someone who is successful in several fields is avoided linking human emotions, such as grief, with often called a Renaissance man or Renaissance responses by animals, ----. woman. A) grief in animals may take forms that are difficult for A) In order to better understand the masterpieces of the humans to recognise as mourning brilliant Renaissance artists such as Michelangelo and Raphael B) observations suggest that the ways in which we mourn might be uniquely human B) While the Renaissance affected every area of human activity and knowledge, from art to zoology C)a growing body of evidence shows that species ranging from dolphins to ducks mourn the passing of C)Because the Renaissance produced individuals with a relatives wide range of interests who excelled in a number of different areas D)research on grief in wild monkeys that live in social units has been surprisingly limited so far D)Although most historians shared the view of the period as a rebirth after the darkness of the Middle Ages E) we think that humans are the only species that grieves over the loss of loved ones E) After science advanced when Renaissance humanists discovered and spread ancient works on mathematics, medicine, and other topics 32. ----, language, as a complicated phenomenon of the human mind, does not seem to be restricted to a 34. Peer pressure is what causes people to do things single region in the brain. that are popular in order to fit in with others, ----. A) If neurolinguists want to examine the functioning of the A) while middle school students influence each other to a human brain in more detail great extent B) Even if certain tasks are fulfilled through coordination B) however, peers are the people who are of similar age, among neurons such as classmates C)Although it is localised mainly on the left side of the C)in other words, some individuals resist peer brain pressure and prioritise their own personal views D)As it is a concrete manifestation of the human mind D)so it can be a very powerful driving force in the lives of adolescents E) When the brain is overwhelmed with long and complex sentences E) as psychologists use positive peer pressure as a method to change a child’s behaviour Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. According to skeletal therapists, it is vital that English, and the most accurate English translation women strengthen their bodies in their 40s, ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) so a considerable number of women do not know very well how to maintain their bone health 37. Alternative medicine has become increasingly B) as bone density starts to gradually decrease, leaving popular in the Western world since about 1975, and the bones fragile during this period has been the subject of much research ever since. A) Yaklaşık 1975’ten beri Batı dünyasında gittikçe C)but hunched shoulders and poor posture can lead to a yaygınlaşan alternatif tıp, bu tarihten itibaren birçok range of health issues in the old age araştırmanın konusu olmuştur. D)as long as muscles work optimally to support the B) Alternatif tıp, Batı dünyasında yaklaşık 1975’ten beri skeleton and the body is positioned correctly gittikçe popüler hâle gelmiştir ve bu tarihten itibaren pek çok araştırmanın konusu olmuştur. E) even though bad posture is known to give them an awkward look and might lead to serious ailments in C)Alternatif tıp, Batı dünyasında yaklaşık 1975’ten beri time gitgide yaygınlaşarak bu tarihten itibaren çok sayıda araştırmanın konusu olmuştur. D)Yaklaşık 1975’ten beri Batı dünyasında gittikçe artan bir popülerliğe sahip olan alternatif tıp, bu tarihten itibaren birçok araştırmaya konu olmuştur. E) Alternatif tıp, yaklaşık 1975’ten beri Batı dünyasında gitgide tanındığı için bu tarihten itibaren birçok 36. Fast food has emerged as one of the biggest araştırmanın konusu olmuştur. enemies of health, especially for children, ----. A) thus its high consumption makes sense when the prices are considered B) provided that the most common cause of obesity is the wide availability of fast food C)while people are highly concerned about the nutritional deficiency of foods like burgers D)so the fast food industry has received a lot of critical attention in recent years E) as many fast food restaurants have started to provide healthier alternatives such as salads Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 38. Forensic investigators make a permanent record of 39. Bullying has been documented in almost every anything at a crime scene that is relevant to the culture around the world, though there is evidence crime, and not only does this attention prevent that it may be more prevalent in some countries dependence on highly unreliable human memory, than in others. and it also provides evidence that is likely to be A) Dünya genelinde neredeyse bütün ülkelerde zorbalığa accepted in court. dair kanıtlar bulunmaktadır ancak bazı kültürlerde A) Adli araştırmacıların olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin diğerlerinde olduğundan daha yaygın olabileceği ispat kalıcı kaydını tutmaları ve onların bu dikkatleri, edilmiştir. oldukça güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmayı engellemekle kalmaz, mahkemede B) Dünya genelinde neredeyse her kültürde kanıtları olan muhtemelen kabul edilebilecek kanıt da sağlar. zorbalığın bazı ülkelerde diğerlerinde olduğundan daha yaygın olabileceği ispat edilmiştir. B) Olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin kalıcı kaydını tutan C)Dünya genelinde neredeyse her kültürde bulunduğu adli araştırmacılar ve onların bu dikkatleri, oldukça ispat edilmiş olsa da zorbalığın bazı ülkelerde güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmayı diğerlerine oranla daha yaygın olduğuna dair kanıtlar engellemekle birlikte mahkemeye muhtemelen kabul bulunmuştur. edilebilecek kanıt sağlar. D)Zorbalığın dünya çapında neredeyse her kültürde var C)Adli araştırmacılar, olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin olduğu ispat edilmiştir ancak bazı ülkelerde kalıcı kaydını tutarlar ve bu dikkat sadece oldukça diğerlerinde olduğundan daha yaygın olabileceğine güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmayı dair kanıtlar bulunmaktadır. engellemekle kalmaz aynı zamanda mahkemede muhtemelen kabul edilebilecek kanıt da sağlar. E) Bazı ülkelerde diğerlerine oranla daha yaygın olabileceğine dair kanıtlar bulunan zorbalığın, dünya D)Adli araştırmacılar, olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin genelinde neredeyse her kültürde var olduğu ispat kalıcı kaydını dikkatle tutarlar ve bu, hem oldukça edilmiştir. güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmalarını engeller hem de mahkemede muhtemelen kabul edilebilecek kanıt sunmalarını sağlar. E) Adli araştırmacılar olay yerinde suç ile ilgili her şeyin kalıcı kaydını dikkatli bir şekilde tutarak hem oldukça güvenilmez olan insan hafızasına bağımlı olmaktan kaçınırlar hem de mahkemede muhtemelen kabul edilebilecek kanıt elde ederler. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 40. Aşırı yağlı yiyecekler tüketen insanların diğerlerine 41. Anoreksiya nervoza; perhiz ve ince olma takıntısının göre kalitesiz gece uykusundan yakınmaları daha aşırı kilo kaybına yol açtığı bir beslenme muhtemeldir, çünkü yağ tüketimi hormonları ve bozukluğudur, ancak birey kilo kaybını bir sağlık metabolizmayı olumsuz etkiler, ki bunların ikisi de problemi olarak kabul etmez. uykuyu düzenleyen biyolojik saatle etkileşim A) Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder caused by an içerisindedir. individual’s obsession with dieting and thinness that A) People who live on high-fat foods are more likely to results in excessive weight loss, though the individual suffer from poor night-time sleep than others, because does not accept the weight loss as a health problem. hormones and metabolism, both of which interact with the internal clock to regulate sleep, are adversely B) Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder in which an affected by fat intake. individual is obsessed with dieting and thinness and thus loses excessive weight, but the individual does B) People who consume high-fat foods are more likely to not view the weight loss as a health problem. suffer from poor night-time sleep than others, as fat intake negatively affects hormones and metabolism, C)Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder where both of which interact with the internal clock that obsession with dieting and thinness leads to excessive regulates sleep. weight loss, but the individual does not acknowledge the weight loss as a health problem. C)Because fat intake negatively affects both hormones D)Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder that leads an and metabolism and their interaction with the internal individual to lose excessive weight because of his or clock that regulates sleep, people who prefer high-fat her obsession with dieting and thinness; however, the foods are more likely to suffer from poor night-time individual does not consider the weight loss as a sleep than others. health problem. D)When people consume high-fat foods, they become E) Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder that causes an more likely to suffer from poor night-time sleep than individual who is obsessed with dieting and thinness to others, as fat intake adversely affects hormones and lose excessive weight, which is not seen as a health metabolism, both of which interact with the internal problem by that individual. clock in regulating sleep. E) Compared to others, people who eat high-fat foods are more likely to suffer from poor night-time sleep and the negative effect of the fat intake on their hormones and metabolism, both of which interact with the internal clock that regulates sleep. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 42. İlk kentlerin tam olarak ne zaman, nerede ve nasıl ortaya çıktığına dair devam eden tartışmalar olsa da çoğu araştırmacı bu kentlerin beş ya da altı bin yıl önce dünyanın çeşitli bölgelerinde kurulduğunu ileri sürmektedir. A) Most researchers claim that the first cities were built five or six thousand years ago in various regions around the world, yet there are still ongoing debates about precisely when, where and how these cities arose. B) Even though discussions go on with regard to exactly when, where and how the first cities arose, many researchers argue that these cities were built five or six thousand years ago in various regions around the world. C) Most researchers put forward that the first cities were built five or six thousand years ago in different parts of the world although debates still continue regarding exactly when, where and how these cities arose. D) Although there are ongoing debates about exactly when, where and how the first cities arose, most researchers put forward that these cities were built five or six thousand years ago in various regions around the world. E) In spite of the ongoing debates about precisely when, where and how the first cities arose, most researchers presume that these cities in different regions around the world were built five or six thousand years ago. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. Which of the following could be true of the inventor of eyeglasses? A) His usual work involved devising new instruments that You may think that the leap from naked-eye observation improved human vision. to instrument-aided vision could be one of the greatest advances in the history of the planet. But nobody set out B) He was an experienced glassmaker who had a keen to invent a telescope or eyeglasses. One of the deepest interest in optics. and most widespread human conceptions was faith in the unaided human senses, particularly the naked eye. C)He may have been an old inventor who did not want to We do not know who invented eyeglasses, how or boast about his invention. where. Everything we know suggests that they were invented by chance, and by a layman who had not been D)Since he had difficulty seeing while working with glass taught about optics. Perhaps an elderly glassmaker disks, he invented eyeglasses to improve his vision. making glass disks for leaded windows tested a disk by E) He might have invented eyeglasses unintentionally looking through it and found to his delight that he could while working on an unrelated project. see much better. We can suspect that the inventor was not an academic, as professors would delight in boasting of their invention, and before the 13th century, we have no record by any such self-styled inventor. The Italian word lente (English ‘lens’ from ‘lentil’ - the edible seed) or lente di vetro (glass lentil) first used to describe the invention was obviously unacademic; it is clearly not the sort of word that a professor would use to describe 45. What makes the author think that the invention of the application of his optical theories. From the first eyeglasses was unacademic? recorded uses of eyeglasses before 1300 until the A) Most academicians did not pay attention to this invention of the telescope nearly three hundred years invention as they were captivated by a more later, lenses were ignored by scholars. sophisticated tool – the telescope. B) The very first word to refer to this invention seemed too odd to be linked with optical theories formulated by a professor. 43. What was the reason for the initial lack of interest in C)Eyeglasses were invented by a glassmaker who did making instruments for improving human vision? not have any knowledge about optical theories. A) People saw no prospects for developments in the field D)Professors would not consider the invention of of optics with respect to improving human vision. eyeglasses remarkable enough to boast about. B) Instruments that aided human vision were not a E) Professors actually began to study lenses in a detailed popular topic of interest among scholars and way after the invention of the telescope. glassmakers. C)There were too few scholars who had the necessary skills to invent instruments that could improve human vision. D)Scholars were not willing to collaborate with each other to invent optical devices. E) People had a strongly-held belief in the superiority of the naked eye. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 46. What is the main idea of the passage? A) Like most other inventions in the modern world, eyeglasses are the product of human wisdom and struggle. B) Despite being an important technological innovation, the specifics related to the invention of eyeglasses remain unknown. C)Not all scientific projects lead to success despite the concentrated efforts of academicians. D)Scholars in the past were often against new technologies, so they rarely used them even if they enhanced the quality of their lives. E) The etymology of the word lente gives us reliable information about the inventor of the greatest advancement in optical technology. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. What is the author’s attitude towards the current US administration’s climate policies? A)impartial B)dissatisfied The annual melt of Arctic ice is under way, and the melt is getting worse and worse. The size of the ice cap C)indifferent D)appreciative where the melt is taking place has become the smallest since satellite records began. It will not be many more E)sarcastic years until the Arctic is ice-free in summer. This is not news. Nor is the fact that the US is about to break its promise on its climate change policies, again. The scale and speed of worrying events in the Arctic is increasing, so is the recklessness of the current administration’s climate policies. The two are closely connected: without comprehensive, rapid, global action, there is zero 49. It is clearly stated in the passage that the antibiotic chance of preventing irreversible change in the Arctic, crisis ----. which may bring catastrophe to the rest of the world. What is also not-news is the antibiotic crisis. For years, A) might have been alleviated thanks to the extensive if not decades, medics have been warning that overuse use penicillin is driving up resistance, threating to propel us back to a pre-penicillin age when common bacterial infections B) has diminished as a result of coordinated efforts to could be fatal. Both are large, complex problems arising raise awareness of the issue from technological progress. Both are tragedies that require collective action. But on antibiotic resistance, C)could have been prevented if doctors had been there are signs that the problem is getting less severe, warned about it much earlier thanks largely to changing prescription habits, following great collective action, which is missing in the climate D)is different from the climate change crisis in terms of change problem. politicians’ level of sensitivity E) can be tackled through the effective use of technological developments 47. According to the passage, the Arctic melt ----. A) has only recently been found to cause ice-free summers in the Arctic soon 50. What is the main aim of the author in writing this B) has finally led the US to keep its promise on its climate passage? change policies A) To emphasise the importance of collective action in C)was taking place at a faster pace before satellite addressing major global problems recordings began B) To show how carefully governments are trying to cope D)will possibly result in worldwide devastation due to a with global issues lack of sound climate policies C)To criticise the US government’s policies on climate E) is one of the most immediate priorities of a large change and the antibiotic crisis number of governments worldwide D)To compare the methods used in the handling of the antibiotic crisis and climate change E) To highlight the incompetence of policy-makers in combatting global tragedies Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. What caused child labourers in the United States to become illiterate? A) They were supposed to contribute to the nation’s Child labour has traditionally referred to the use of economic growth, so factory-owners did not allow children to perform adult work on farms and in factories them to go to school. and mines. Ironically, it has helped as well as hindered B) They believed that engaging in food and tobacco the development of universal public education in the production would bring them much more benefits than United States. Historically, this problem did not become attending school. a controversial social issue until the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in the late 18th century. After a C)They did not have to learn to read and write to perform series of wars produced a shortage of adult male labour simple tasks in factories. in Britain, cotton mill owners offered children free room and meals in company-owned dormitories in exchange D)Landowners did not want them to go to the schools for their labour. Government authorities were delighted where their children were taught since they thought to get homeless children off the streets. For the mills, this would cause a social conflict. the introduction of child labour proved one of the most profitable innovations of the Industrial Revolution. The E) A great majority of the schools were only accepting the practice spread to the United States, which also faced a children of landowners, so they could not receive shortage of adult male factory workers to produce food education. and tobacco, the staples of the new nation’s trade. At the time, most schools were already reserved for the children of landowners, and therefore, an entire generation of child labourers had grown up illiterate by the 1830s. As the quality of goods they produced deteriorated and overseas sales of American goods declined, many of the very industrialists who had 53. What was the real reason why industrialists started exploited child labour at the turn of the century joined to promote universal compulsory education? social reformers who wanted to end such exploitation, A) Child labour combined with compulsory education was supporting universal compulsory education to ensure a practical option to cope with the shortage of adult that their future workers would be able to read, write and male factory workers. calculate. B) Child labour eventually had an adverse impact on the quality of American goods, which reduced export earnings. C)Most of the child labourers were unable to read, write 51. Why did child labour become an important issue and calculate, which was a disturbing fact for during the Industrial Revolution? industrialists in sociocultural terms. A) The number of homeless children in the streets D)Social reformers forced industrialists to acknowledge increased dramatically. the fact that children must be well-educated. B) Government officials were reluctant to provide E) Social reformers were against the brutal exploitation of homeless children with free room and meals. child labour since children could not receive compulsory education. C)The size of the labour force in Britain declined since wars resulted in a lack of adult male workers. D)The development of universal public education was enhanced by government authorities. E) Children who worked for cotton mill owners could earn a huge amount of money. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 54. What is the primary purpose of the author? A) To explain the reasons why child labour was not as effective in the United States as it was in Britain B) To inform readers about how farms, factories and mines throughout the world benefitted from child labour in the late 1800s C)To emphasise that farms, factories and mines would not have been productive enough without child labour during the Industrial Revolution D)To highlight that child labour, initially considered advantageous, later proved to be disadvantageous E) To draw attention to the successful collaboration between industrialists and social reformers to support universal compulsory education Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. It is stated in the passage that Isaac Asimov ----. A) led the way to discovery of several exoplanets that host life-friendly exotic liquids such as hexane, ethers Earth is teeming with life — and water makes it all and chloroform possible. But elsewhere in the cosmos, life might be B) was the first person to understand that a solvent built from different chemicals that dissolve and chemical, even if not water, is necessary for life to assemble in some other liquid: perhaps methane, develop kerosene, or even chloroform. For now, it is not feasible for humans to set foot on those worlds and see what is C)came up with the idea that life might have formed there, but researchers are exploring some possibilities elsewhere in the universe with a different chemistry in labs here on Earth. The idea of a strange parallel than we know form of life, whose cells do the same basic things as ours using a completely different chemistry, is not new D)developed his thoughts about the strange parallel to science. In fact, Isaac Asimov broached the subject forms of life using the data provided by the Cassini in his 1962 essay “Not as We Know It: The Chemistry of spacecraft which studies Saturn Life.” And in 2004, the same year the Cassini spacecraft entered Saturn’s orbit, biochemist Steven Benner E) inspired Steve Benner who wrote in 2004 that liquid proposed that on a world like Saturn’s moon Titan, life hydrocarbons might make life possible on a world like might use liquid hydrocarbons as a solvent (a liquid that Saturn’s moon Titan can dissolve other substances), the way water is used on Earth. With new exoplanets joining the roster of known worlds every day, it is likely that some of them have oceans (or at least warm puddles) of hexane, ethers, chloroform, or other exotic liquids that might serve as a source of life, which we do not yet know. 57. The underlined word in the passage ‘broached’ is closest in meaning to ----. A)introduced B)distorted 55. According to the passage, chemicals such as methane, kerosene and chloroform ----. C)revised D)obscured A) cannot be compared with water in their capacity to dissolve life chemicals E)simplified B) have been found on several exoplanets humans are planning to set foot on C)have been proved to be much better alternatives to water, which makes life possible 58. What is the passage mainly about? D)could possibly be solvents of various chemicals that form life A) The contributions of Asimov and Benner to the understanding of life on Earth E) should be researched more extensively in order to protect life on Earth B) The search for alternatives to water that can support extraterrestrial life C)The newly discovered exoplanets being studied to determine if they potentially host life D)The role of water as a solvent in the formation of life on Earth E) The chemical processes underlying the formation of water on other planets Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. It is understood from the passage that in the merit-based pay system, ----. A) supervisors’ strict control over employees may Companies often link pay increases to a measure backfire as weak performance of performance to motivate and retain the best employees, which may also ensure the companies’ B) employees are allowed to rate their own performance long-term success. Among many forms of individual performance-related pay, the most popular is C)supervisors’ rating points determine the amount of the merit-based pay. Under such a system, an employee’s pay increase pay increase is based on a supervisor’s assessment of performance over a previous time period, usually the D)an employee gets a pay increase when his or her prior 12 months. The annual cycle of the pay scheme performance is higher than those of others begins with the establishment of performance objectives, either by the supervisor or jointly between E) employees may get a pay increase during the the employee and the supervisor. Progress is monitored supervision period over the ensuing months, and the supervisor rates the performance of an employee, on a given scale, against these objectives. Each of these rating points is then associated with the amount of a pay increase, expressed as a percentage, so the higher the rating, the higher the pay increase. The size of the pay increase can also vary depending on the position in the pay 61. What can be concluded about a pay increase in the range. Typically, employees at the bottom of the pay merit-based pay system? range with high-performance ratings will get a larger A) Younger employees may not get a high pay increase increase than an employee near the top of the since they may not compete well with experienced pay range with a high-performance rating. In some ones. cases, the intention is to enable the employee to reach the top of the pay range at the same time as he or she B) Employees deserve a pay increase only if they have is ready to be promoted. The difficulty is that this gained the qualifications required for a promotion. system is not supported by all employees. Research has demonstrated that merit-based pay is attractive C)Companies try to keep the best employees at the to some occupations, for example managers, and to top of the pay range by providing them with the certain demographic groups, such as white-collar highest pay increase. workers, high-income earners, and younger employees, but it might not be the best payment approach for all D)No matter how hard they try, employees in the lowest occupations and companies. position cannot get a pay increase as high as that of the ones who are at the top of the pay range. E) Industrious employees with a low income may get a higher percentage of pay increase than those having a high income. 59. It is stated in the passage that companies ----. A) can contribute to their future prosperity by motivating their employees with a pay increase B) use various forms of payment depending on the importance of the position C)evaluate their employees’ previous performance to lay out future performance criteria D)increase the motivation of their employees by setting attainable performance objectives E) should use individual performance-related pay to motivate their non-efficient employees Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 62. What is the drawback of the merit-based pay system according to the passage? A) Employees have no right to take part in the formulation of performance criteria. B) It is not efficient because it does not guarantee the promotion of hard-working employees. C)Rating points may not accurately reflect an employee’s performance. D)It may not be favoured by everyone since it benefits certain positions and careers. E) It does not help to assess employees’ monthly performance since it is applied annually. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Doctor: option to complete the dialogue.  Most people don’t worry about their eye health, but we often say that all of us need an eye test, even if we can see fine. 63. Student:  How do leaves know that it’s autumn? Reporter:  You’re right, but people generally don’t see a Teacher: doctor unless they have a problem with their  During the autumn, every day is four minutes vision. So, could you tell us why you highlight the shorter than the one before it. This means leaves importance of eye examinations? have four minutes less sunlight. Doctor: Student:  ----  ---- Reporter: Teacher:  It seems early diagnosis is crucial in fighting  Exactly! And, at some point, when it’s simply not some eye diseases. worth the effort, trees shed their leaves. A) If people would make a conscious effort to try to A) In other words, they have a relatively smaller amount understand their visual health through personal of time to change light and water into energy. research, many eye diseases would be less problematic. B) Does this mean some trees closest to streetlights keep their leaves later into autumn? B) Eye tests not only help us treat visual impairment, but they can also reveal the presence of some non-eye C)But the decrease in the amount of sunlight is not the diseases like diabetes and high blood pressure. sole reason, is it? C)Many eye conditions show no ptoms, and if D)So, trees are very strong and in winter even produce people put off eye tests until they experience their own anti-freeze in their cells. ptoms like blurry vision, the damage could already be irreversible. E) That’s because leaves can’t distinguish between D)The frequency of eye tests differs with age and the sunlight and artificial light, right? health of the person, but we often recommend an eye test every two years between ages 19 and 40. E) Visual problems are not the single cause. People should also have an eye test when they experience redness, pain, discharge or flashes of light. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 65. Daisy: 66. Amanda:  Look at the lighthouse over there. It’s on a very  Don't you think people attach too much of their steep hill. Do you think there is someone in it? personal happiness to their weight? Kate: Jane:  ----  Definitely! They're even willing to spend huge sums of money for the slightest chance of being Daisy: thinner, especially overweight people and the  Perhaps the huge antenna on the roof can explain ones who suffer from obesity. that. Amanda: Kate:  Yeah, but so many of them get frustrated in the  So, the lighthouse-keeper just goes there process because it's more complicated than it for periodic maintenance of the equipment. looks. A) I’m not certain. Some modern installations are Jane: controlled remotely from a convenient location.  What do you mean? B) I can’t say for sure, but it seems there is no one there. Amanda: Otherwise, the lights would be on.  ---- C)Probably! Lighthouses usually overlook the sea from a coastal hill and provide a safe shelter for the residents. Jane:  Oh, so dietary advice won't work in the same way D)Yes, and I’m really curious about daily routines of a for everybody. lighthouse-keeper. Watching the ships must be A) The vast majority of people place such a high value on entertaining. being thin that overweight people face prejudice and discrimination. E) I don’t think so. Lighthouses guide ships with a strong light, so why should they be attended? B) The view that undisciplined eating habits are the major cause of weight gain has been widespread for a long time. C)Fortunately, dieticians have been coming up with a variety of new treatments to fight unhealthy weight gain. D)The reality is weight-gain has many causes and there can be various combinations of these causes in different people. E) Permanent lifestyle changes like making healthy food choices can promote long-term weight loss. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Chris: rephrased form of the given sentence.  A group of scientists tried to develop drones that could fly through the hoops or gates used in drone racing, and prepared a track with gates laid out in a circuit. 68. The invention of television was not a single event, but rather it depended on a chain of developments Luke: in electricity, telegraphy, and photography.  Really? Were their drones able to stay on course? A) Though seeming as a distinct event, the invention of television had to wait for several developments in Chris: electricity, telegraphy, and photography.  ---- B) A variety of developments in electricity, telegraphy, Luke: and photography gave rise to the invention of  That’s a key development. A drone that can television, which was seen as a remarkable event. autonomously escape from things in its way could C)Television did not come about all by itself, as a series be useful in a number of contexts. of innovations in electricity, telegraphy, and A) The on-board camera in each device gathered images photography led to its invention. of the gates and the pictures allowed a neural network controlling drones to learn how to pass through them. D)But for the innovations in electricity, telegraphy, and photography, the invention of television could not have B) If they were smarter, they could be relied on to deliver occurred as a spectacular event. packages in complex environments like cities. E) Television developed as a specific invention; however, C)The study revealed that they had to come up with a set of developments in electricity, telegraphy, and better ways for drones to learn to avoid obstacles as photography became more important than its they fly. invention. D)Drones have a habit of crashing, so they planned to alter the position of these obstacles after each lap. E) Their performance in simulated experiments does not guarantee success in real life. It’s early to say that a drone can pilot itself in environments with lots of obstacles like disaster zones. 69. The system of logic, formulated by Aristotle and considered to include the laws that govern thought, remained unaltered until the 19th century. A) The 19th century witnessed a change in the system of logic, which was created by Aristotle after he defined the laws that govern thought. B) Throughout the 19th century, the system of logic developed by Aristotle was believed to involve the laws that govern thought. C)It was only in the 19th century that the system of logic, established by Aristotle and believed to include the laws that govern thought, began to change. D)In the 19th century, the system of logic, which was drawn up by Aristotle, went through a change because the laws that govern thought started to change as well. E) Aristotle is considered to have developed the system of logic, which embraces the laws that govern thought and has not been changed since the 19th century. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 70. Because eating disorders are neither purely physical 71. In the 1950s, popular demand for more powerful nor purely psychological, medical management and cars was met by manufacturers by further psychotherapy should be combined for effective increasing the size of the engine and the rotation treatment. speed, although these changes were at the expense of fuel economy. A) While eating disorders can be separated into physical and psychological ones, successful treatment requires A) In the 1950s, powerful cars with larger engines and a combination of medical intervention and faster rotation speed had a negative impact on fuel psychotherapy. economy, so people wanted manufacturers to produce cars that would be fuel-efficient. B) Eating disorders can be treated effectively with medical intervention or psychotherapy, based on B) Had there been no attempt by manufacturers in the whether they are mostly physical or psychological. 1950s to increase the size of the engine and the rotation speed, people might not have demanded C)To treat eating disorders effectively, regardless of their more powerful cars, and thus fuel economy would classification as physical or psychological, medical have remained stable. management should be accompanied by psychotherapy. C)Even though it led to less economical fuel use, in the 1950s, manufacturers started to make bigger engines D)Given that eating disorders cannot be classified as and increase the rotation speed to persuade people only physical or psychological, effective treatment into buying cars that would become more powerful. should include both medical intervention and psychotherapy. D)People started to seek more powerful cars in the 1950s, and manufacturers responded to this by E) Since eating disorders are not only physical making engines bigger and the rotation speed faster, but psychological as well, psychotherapy should be while it meant damaging the fuel economy. administered more often than medical management to treat them successfully. E) In the 1950s, manufacturers met people’s demand for more powerful cars by making the engine bigger and the rotation speed faster, but they were not able to predict that it would result in a worse fuel economy. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 72-75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the 73. Wilhelm Röntgen was born in Germany, but lived in passage. the Netherlands for part of his childhood. He studied mechanical engineering in Zurich before becoming a lecturer in physics at Strasbourg University in 72. Unlike learning a second language, acquiring a first 1874, and a professor two years later. He took senior or native language does not require systematic positions at several universities during his career. instruction. Parents usually do not teach children ---- However, in the world of science, he is best the rules of language or do not tell them what kinds known for his research into X-rays, and in 1901, he of sentences they can and cannot say. ---- For was awarded the first Nobel Prize in Physics for this example, English speaking children might continue work. to say bringed rather than brought even though A) Röntgen was always shy of having an assistant, and parents occasionally correct them. he usually preferred to work alone and built much of A) Parents' corrections inform children of what is not the apparatus he used by himself. possible in the language they are exposed to. B) By 1900, Röntgen’s discovery of high energy B) Although parents generally do not correct their electromagnetic radiation in the form of X-rays was children, corrections can improve the children's being used in medical diagnosis. language. C)Röntgen studied many different areas of physics, C)Children are rarely corrected, and even when they are, including light, gases, heat transfer, and thermal they resist the correction. conductivity of crystals. D)Children often take advantage of parents' correction D)In his laboratory in Germany, Röntgen discovered and reformulate their utterances. X-rays by accident while he was studying the conduction of electricity through gases at low E) If children ask a question, parents will hardly check for pressure. its grammatical correctness. E) Despite the numerous prizes, medals and honorary doctorates he had, Röntgen retained the characteristics of a strikingly modest man. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 74. There is a new milk in town; there are many, 75. Much of what archaeologists know about past actually. The old alternatives to cow’s milk – soy, human life is uncertain and partial. For example, rice, and coconut milk – are now joined on grocery archaeologists argue about the dates that human shelves by alternative milks made from almonds, life began and changed. New discoveries constantly peanuts, cashews, oats, peas – the list goes on and force scientists to rethink the dating given to major on. You can even buy milk made from potatoes or developments in human prehistory. Even the bananas. ---- But is that really true? Almond and primary method of identifying the age of cashew milks have less than half the calories found discoveries, known as radiocarbon dating, is in cow’s milk, but are lower in protein. For those subject to second-guessing. Often different sources with allergies to nuts, banana milk is the way to go, have different dates. Another difficulty is that there but it can be difficult to find. Each type of alternative are simply not many sources of evidence about early milk has its benefits and limitations. You should human life. ---- Because of these difficulties, much decide what is most important to you – nutrition, of what is known about prehistoric man is based on sustainability, or allergies. the best guesses of scientists who may have devoted their life’s work to the subject. A) Alternative milks are only healthy if combined with a well-balanced diet, though the same is true of cow’s A) The older the historical remains, the more valuable milk. and surprising they are to archaeologists. B) Manufacturers have recently begun to position such B) Archaeologists must form their picture of early life products as a reasonable alternative. based on small sets of discovered materials separated by both time and distance. C)Alternative milks vary greatly in their nutritional value, and while some have a mild flavour, others have a C)Another form of evidence comes from early rock stronger taste. paintings and etchings that have depicted human clothes, hair, and body decoration. D)Most alternative milks are friendlier to the environment than dairy products, as the carbon footprint of D)Archaeologists must carefully dig the remnants of the producing, packaging and transporting cow’s milk is human past from out of the earth. very high. E) The problem of understanding the clothing of early E) However, people do not drink alternative milks for their humans is even more difficult by the fragile nature nutritional benefits; instead, they tend to use them for of fur. their coffee or cereal. Go on to the next page 2019-YDS/2/ENGLISH 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 79. (I) Both students and teachers may consult grammar sentence in the passage. books for a number of reasons.(II)For example, students may be drafting a piece of written work and may want to check if they are using some grammar 76. (I)Astronomers are searching for twins of Earth orbiting rules correctly. (III)Alternatively, a teacher, having other sunlike stars. (II)Yet, the more closely scientists noticed that a student is making a lot of mistakes in one study our own planet's habitability, the less ideal our particular area, might tell that student to look up the world appears to be. (III)Detecting Earth-like twins language in a grammar book to understand it better. remains at the edge of our technical capabilities. (IV)There are a large number of grammar books (IV)Larger super-Earths orbiting smaller stars are easier available, most of which are criticised by students for to detect and may be the most common type of planet. including highly difficult grammar exercises.(V) When it (V) New thinking suggests that these systems may also comes to teachers, they often use grammar books to be habitable and more conducive to life than our own check grammar concepts, especially when an area is so planet. complex that they need to re-visit it from time to time to remind themselves of the full picture. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 77. (I)The world of plants is rich and diversified and produces numerous herbal remedies that have been 80. (I) The ancient Olympic Games, known to us from used for thousands of years. (II)A qualified herbalist and ancient literature and art and from modern archaeology, a well-respected herbal guide or specialist are generally were the oldest and most prestigious athletic expected to be conferred with for the most effective competition of antiquity.(II) Although they have inspired herbal treatments. (III)Today, modern scientific research the modern Olympics, the ancient games must be seen continues to document and validate the historical in their own ancient Greek cultural context.(III)Despite traditional uses of many herbs as well as new uses of common misperceptions, the ancient Olympics differed some traditional medicines. (IV)The safe and from their modern counterpart in organisation, events, responsible use of traditional herbal medicines offers an and ideology. (IV)The permanent home of the ancient important way to lower health care costs and increase Olympics was an isolated religious sanctuary on the the wellness of the public. (V)It is most likely that more Alpheios River in the territory of the state of Elis in scientific research will continue to place herbs in a southwestern Greece. (V) With sacred rituals and position to offer many benefits in the new medicine of wreaths of olive leaves as prizes, the ancient Olympic the 21st century. Games were part of a great religious festival in honour of Zeus, the Greeks’ chief god. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 78. (I) Water is one of the essential natural resources that have been the centre of attention in the last century due to pollution and excessive consumption, particularly in the developed world. (II) Water itself does not conduct electricity particularly well, yet it is the chemicals dissolved in it that are the source of the trouble. (III) For example, the salt content of seawater makes it a million times better at conducting electricity than ultra-pure water. (IV)Even so, even a trace of water can prove fatal with high voltages. (V) This is the very reason why people have been killed thinking they can move live cables using a freshly broken tree branch. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V END OF THE TEST CHECK YOUR ANSWERS 192001043743750500K04 O 001 2019 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 2 2019 - YDS/2 08-09-2019 1. B 48. B 2. D 49. B 3. E 50. A 4. B 51. C 5. D 52. E 6. B 53. B 7. B 54. D 8. D 55. D 9. C 56. C 10. C 57. A 11. D 58. B 12. B 59. A 13. C 60. C 14. C 61. E 15. A 62. D 16. B 63. A 17. E 64. C 18. E 65. A 19. C 66. D 20. B 67. A 21. D 68. C 22. D 69. C 23. C 70. D 24. D 71. D 25. B 72. C 26. E 73. C 27. C 74. B 28. A 75. B 29. D 76. B 30. E 77. B 31. C 78. A 32. C 79. D 33. C 80. D 34. D 35. B 36. D 37. B 38. C 39. D 40. B 41. C 42. D 43. E 44. E 45. B 46. B 47. D T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (2021-YDS/2) İNGİLİZCE 10 EKİM 2021 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or 4. The population of koalas dropped ---- during the expression to fill the space. early part of the 20th century because they were over-hunted for their fur. A)strictly B)drastically 1. Attaining ---- in the current job is a basic career strategy, given that organisations make promotion C)cautiously D)ardently decisions, at least in part, on an employee’s present performance. E)merely A)assurance B)competence C)balance D)recession E)insurance 5. When neurological issues like aphasia and dyslexia arise, they often ---- themselves in the things we say and how we say them. A)alienate B)improve 2. Despite its being a remote and harsh environment, C)manifest D)diminish there is ---- about ownership of the North Pole as there could be rich natural resources beneath the E)receive ice. A)discrimination B)substitution C)exposure D)controversy E)neglect 6. When you cook meat, a chemical reaction turns creatine into a group of compounds called heterocyclic amines and there is some evidence that these compounds ---- cancer in high concentrations. A)rely on B)break into 3. The reasons for an urban climate are heat storage, C)pass for D)call off trapping of radiation, increasing roughness and less evaporation, which are seen in cities worldwide but E)lead to are most ---- in densely built-up megacities. A)evident B)arbitrary C)convenient D)constructive E)mediocre 1 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 7-16: For these questions, choose the best 9. While many people welcome the chance ---- exotic word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). foods or novel flavours, others do not even consider ---- foods beyond their usual repertoire. A) to be tasting / having consumed 7. Recently, nutritional scientists ---- strong evidence that the eating, drinking, and exercise habits of the B) tasting / to have consumed Mediterranean people ---- a major role in their low risk for heart disease. C)to have tasted / to be consuming A) uncover / are playing D)having tasted / to consume B) are uncovering / had been playing E) to taste / consuming C)have uncovered / play D)may uncover / have played E) uncovered / had played 10. People intuitively tend to equate happiness ---- freedom, however without obstacles ---- our desires it is harder to know what we really want, let alone fulfilling them. A)between / on B)with / to 8. There are some people who ---- objects from 6 metres away with the same sharpness that a C)at / into D)in / among normal-sighted person ---- in to 4.5 metres to achieve. E)for / from A) may view / had to move B) must view / could move C)can view / would have to move D)ought to view / should have moved E) might view / can move 11. People who feel strongly that they do not want to be awake and alert ---- certain procedures may not be good candidates ---- local or regional anaesthesia. A)through / at B)by / with C)during / for D)upon / to E)against / about 2 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 12. ---- social media has become widely integrated into 15. ---- you are a long-time fan ---- casual follower of the everyday life, there is a growing interest in series of Street Fighter, you are already well-aware understanding its impact and the norms of online that it is constantly updated with new characters, conduct. costumes, and story content. A)Supposing that B)Although A)Both / and B)Neither / nor C)Now that D)As much as C)Rather / than D)Whether / or E)While E)Not only / but also 13. For many years, social researchers regarded gossip 16. ---- many individual cases of malicious data leaks as unworthy of scientific investigation; ----, online that have caught the public eye, there has sociologists have recently begun to recognise been very little research examining the scale of the gossip as an important feature of social life. problem. A)accordingly B)in other words A)Similar to B)Due to C)however D)as a result C)As a result of D)In accordance with E)for example E)Despite 14. In diabetic patients, even though food intake may be increased, weight loss can occur ---- muscles and fat stores may shrink as they are not getting the necessary glucose. A)because B)given that C)as long as D)although E)in case 3 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 18. passage. A) cannot be exposed Elvis Presley is the single most significant figure in rock B) are not exposed and roll history, and it is hard to imagine rock and roll without his contributions.(17)----revolutionising the way C)would not have been exposed popular music sounded and looked, he forever changed the way young people relate to music. Emerging from D)should not have been exposed the racially segregated American South in the mid-1950s, he promoted racial harmony by making E) have not been exposed African-American music accessible to millions of white teens who(18)---- to it otherwise. Furthermore, in popularising rock and roll (19)---- a worldwide audience, Elvis almost single-handedly altered the parameters of the entertainment industry. By many estimates, he remains history’s biggest-selling recording artist. Elvis certainly was not the first white person to perform music rooted in black culture; (20)----, he was the first to fuse elements of rhythm and blues, country, and gospel into 19. a charismatic package. Charismatic and overconfident A)under B)towards yet humble and polite, generous and charitable yet selfish and tyrannical, Elvis (21)---- the contradictions of his time and his genre, and this distinctive combination C)for D)against of different musical styles still enchants too many people around the world. E)without 17. 20. A)Instead of B)Regardless of A)for instance B)as a result C)In contrast with D)Despite C)in short D)that is E)In addition to E)however 21. A)ceased B)falsified C)condemned D)embodied E)devastated 4 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the 24. passage. A)if B)although If you are locked in a constant struggle with your C)moreover D)unless willpower, here is some good news. There is some evidence to show that thinking about new healthy habits E)while as opportunities (22)----obligations can help you stay on track. In a recent study at Yale University in the US, people were trained to think about the positive (23)---- of healthy foods. The researchers told them, for instance, that broccoli was crunchy and delicious and that (24)----they ate it, they would feel good about themselves. The results were striking. “We found that we can actually get people to increase their cravings (25)---- healthy foods.” says Hedy Kober, PhD, who 25. headed the study. In a second study, her team trained A)to B)into C)on people to engage in that same type of thinking repeatedly. They discovered that if people practised D)for E)in looking at healthy foods and considering their wonderful qualities, it encouraged them (26)---- better dietary choices and they consumed fewer calories in everyday life. 26. A)being made B)to have made 22. A)because of B)rather than C)making D)make C)contrary to D)according to E)to make E)in spite of 23. A)rations B)possessions C)attributes D)structures E)senses 5 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 27-36: For these questions, choose the best 29. Because of the health hazards that lead poses for option to complete the given sentence. humans and other animals, ----. A) tetraethyl lead, which releases free lead to the environment when broken down within an engine, has 27. Even though many people still remain unconvinced been banned for use as a gasoline additive that global warming is a real phenomenon, ----. A) the evidence in support of man-made climate change B) lead compounds were once widely used for paints as is quite overwhelming they covered surfaces well and were available in a number of vivid colours B) the consequences for our lives are still uncertain and absolutely way too complex C)lead has been popular as a covering for underground cables, such as buried cables that carry telephone C)it is reassuring that everything around us changed messages simply through chance D)alloys of lead are quite popular for the manufacture of D)some people reject the idea that it has been affecting solders; for example, ordinary plumber’s solder the entire world contains about two parts of lead to one part of tin E) the lack of some solid proof makes it hard to accept E) today, physiologists understand that the human body the situation is able to excrete about two milligrams of lead efficiently each day 28. ---- if doing so helps them to pursue the goals that are aligned with their values. 30. Unless rich countries help poor ones adopt greener A) Meditative practices may not be beneficial for technologies, ----. everyone with depression A) some projects that lie in the heart of environmental protection could come to a halt B) The study of how people react to mind-altering practices like meditation is still in its infancy B) it is in their interest to help establish a sustainable energy future for all the world’s inhabitants C) Psychologically flexible people show willingness to welcome uncomfortable states C)they barely depend on fossil fuels, which are damaging to both human health and the environment D)Psychologists call the ability to walk through bad experiences ‘resilience’ D)every country, regardless of their economic power, is expected to contribute to global welfare E) Those with lower than average signs of post-traumatic stress disorder have higher scores of psychological E) energy consumption in the rich world would always flexibility dwarf that in poor countries 6 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 31. Provided that loan programmes are properly 33. Today, the sanitary landfill is the major method of designed, effectively managed and a high rate of disposing waste materials in North America and recovery is achieved, ----. other developed countries, ----. A) an important feature of student loan schemes is that A) while some older landfills are being mined for useful they offer financial assistance and subsidies to products such as methane gas that can be used as individual students, rather than to institutions fuel B) there are important differences in the way different loan B) just as many tons of solid waste dumped in a landfill programmes are administered, particularly in terms of today will not decompose until 30 years from now how they are operated C)as composting and burning up require uniformity in the C)implications for student loans of what is variously form and chemical properties of the waste for efficient described as international labour mobility or 'brain operation drain' have received limited attention D)because about 70% of materials that are routinely D)student loans can make a valuable contribution to disposed of in landfills could be recycled instead relieving the financial pressures facing higher education E) though considerable efforts are being made to find alternative methods, such as recycling and E) sound financial management is required to maintain composting the capital value of the loan fund and cover administrative costs 34. The popularity of many flat-faced dog breeds such as French bulldogs has risen dramatically in recent 32. Many researchers and clinicians observe that the years ----. traditional Chinese medicine can hope to function in A) because French bulldogs have short faces that can full partnership with Western medicine ----. make breathing difficult A) even though some herbs are used routinely in therapy, including treatment of some common diseases B) even though French bulldogs are not seen as dangerous as other dog breeds B) only if practitioners pay attention to the most recent discoveries made by immunological research studies C)although there are regular assertions that they are prone to many health issues C)but Chinese doctors are well aware of the value of using traditional medicine to cure diseases D)given that there is limited reliable evidence on the wider general health of flat-faced dogs D)whenever there is a chance to get the medical professionals in the West to question medical E) while it enables ongoing identification of breed practices health-related priorities E) as if the immunological effects were due to the unknown or unrecognised substances in herbs 7 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. The pleasures of chocolate, tea, and coffee drinking English, and the most accurate English translation have been known to humans for centuries, ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) while caffeine is a member of the alkaloid family, a group of compounds obtained from numerous plants 37. In 1991, two German mountaineers discovered the B) because full characterisation of caffeine’s molecular mummy and personal artefacts of a man now called structure was completed by a German chemist as Ötzi the Iceman in the Ötztal Alps, which were well-preserved in the ice for 5,300 years. C)since researchers identified the active agents in tea A) 1991 yılında iki Alman dağcı Ötztal Alplerinde bir and chocolate and gave them various names adamın 5300 yıl boyunca buz içinde oldukça iyi bir şekilde korunmuş mumyasını ve kişisel eşyalarını D)but the isolation of caffeine from these everyday treats bulmuşlardır ve bu adam günümüzde Buz Adam Ötzi was accomplished only in the early 1800s olarak anılmaktadır. E) although caffeine is one of the most widely used B) 1991 yılında iki Alman dağcı Ötztal Alplerinde, central nervous system stimulants worldwide günümüzde Buz Adam Ötzi olarak anılan bir adamın 5300 yıl boyunca buz içinde oldukça iyi bir şekilde korunmuş mumyasını ve kişisel eşyalarını buldular. C)Günümüzde Buz Adam Ötzi olarak anılan bir adamın 5300 yıl boyunca buz içinde oldukça iyi bir şekilde korunmuş mumyası ve kişisel eşyaları, iki Alman dağcı tarafından 1991 yılında Ötztal Alplerinde bulunmuştur. 36. Individuals with social phobia fear being humiliated D)İki Alman dağcı tarafından 1991 yılında Ötztal while doing something in public, ----. Alplerinde bulunan ve günümüzde Buz Adam Ötzi A) because those who receive treatment can completely olarak anılan bir adamın mumyası ve kişisel eşyaları, overcome their fears in social life 5300 yıl boyunca buz içinde oldukça iyi bir şekilde korunmuştur. B) and therefore they will avoid any situation in which such participation may be required E) 1991 yılında Ötztal Alplerinde iki Alman dağcı tarafından 5300 yıl boyunca buz altında oldukça iyi bir C)as one of the most common manifestations of social şekilde korunmuş mumyası ve kişisel eşyaları bulunan phobia involves public speaking adam, günümüzde Buz Adam Ötzi olarak anılmaktadır. D)although they have intense fears of social interactions, such as meeting others and dating E) whereas it generally develops after puberty and peaks after the age of 30 8 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 38. Because salt is indispensable to life, and uniquely 39. Objectivity refers to perceiving and describing flavours foods, humans have been preoccupied with something from as neutral and unbiased a it since the beginning of recorded history. perspective as possible in order to produce observations that can be verified by a trained A) İnsanlar, tarih kayıt altına alınmaya başladığından bu community of observers. yana tuzla yakından ilgilenmişlerdir çünkü yaşam için vazgeçilmez olan tuz, yiyecekleri eşsiz bir şekilde A) Nesnellik, bir şeyi olabildiğince tarafsız ve önyargısız tatlandırmaktadır. bir bakış açısı üzerinden algılayıp betimlemenin yanı sıra söz konusu şeyin eğitimli bir gözlemciler B) İnsanlar kayıt altına alınan tarihin başlangıcından topluluğu tarafından doğrulanabilmesi anlamına itibaren yaşam için vazgeçilmez olan ve yiyeceklere gelmektedir. eşsiz bir tat veren tuzla yakından ilgilenmişlerdir. B) Nesnellikten kastedilen, eğitimli bir gözlemciler C)İnsanların kayıt altına alınan tarihin başlangıcından topluluğu tarafından gözlemlenebilecek algılamaları ve beri tuzla yakından ilgilenmesinin nedeni yiyeceklere betimlemeleri ortaya koymak ve bunun için mümkün eşsiz bir biçimde tat vermesinin yanı sıra yaşam için olduğunca tarafsız ve önyargısız bakış açıları de vazgeçilmez olmasıdır. üretmektir. D)Tuz, yaşam için vazgeçilmez olduğu ve yiyeceklere eşsiz bir biçimde tat verdiği için insanlar kayıt altına C)Eğitimli bir gözlemciler topluluğu tarafından alınan tarihin başlangıcından beri tuzla yakından doğrulanabilecek gözlemler ortaya koyabilmek için bir ilgilenmişlerdir. şeyi mümkün olduğunca tarafsız ve önyargısız bir bakış açısıyla algılamak ve betimlemek gerekmektedir E) Yiyecekleri eşsiz bir biçimde tatlandıran tuz, yaşam ve bu da nesnellik olarak tanımlanır. için vazgeçilmez olduğundan, tarihin ilk kayıt altına alındığı andan itibaren insanoğlunu fazlasıyla D)Nesnellik, eğitimli bir gözlemciler topluluğu tarafından ilgilendirmiştir. doğrulanabilecek gözlemler ortaya koymak için bir şeyi mümkün olduğunca tarafsız ve önyargısız bir bakış açısıyla algılamak ve betimlemek anlamını taşımaktadır. E) Bir şeyi mümkün olduğunca tarafsız ve önyargısız bir bakış açısıyla algılamak ve betimlemek, nesnelliğin eğitimli bir gözlemciler topluluğu tarafından gözlemlenebilecek şekilde ortaya koyulmasına bağlıdır. 9 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 40. Yeni deneyimlere açık insanlar, görsel bilgiyi farklı 41. Evlat edinme, ister sağlıklı bir yenidoğan isterse de şekillerde işleme yeteneğine sahiptir ve bu, özel ihtiyacı olan herhangi bir yaştaki bir çocuk yaratıcılıklarının artmasını sağlamaktadır, böylece bu olsun, bir aileye ihtiyacı olan tüm çocukların özelliğe sahip insanlar farklı bakış açıları sayesinde gereksinimlerine uygun olarak sürekli gelişen bir diğerleri tarafından gözden kaçırılan çözümleri fark olgudur. etmede iyi olabilirler. A) Adoption is a phenomenon that constantly evolves in A) People who are open to new experiences have the relation to the needs of any children who need ability to boost their creativity by processing visual families, whether they are healthy newborns or information in different ways, so people with this trait children of any age with special needs. can be good at spotting solutions that others overlooked, thanks to their diverse outlook. B) Adoption is a phenomenon involving the needs of children, whether they are healthy newborns or B) People who are open to new experiences have the children at all ages with special needs, and it ability to spot solutions overlooked by others thanks to constantly evolves to meet those needs. their diverse outlook, which is a trait that enables these people to process visual information in different C)The phenomenon of adoption evolves constantly to fit ways and helps boost their creativity. the needs of all children in need of families, be it healthy newborns or children of any age with special C)People who have the ability to process visual needs. information in different ways that boost their creativity are open to new experiences; therefore, people with D)Adoption refers to a phenomenon that constantly this trait can be good at spotting solutions overlooked evolves in order to meet the needs of children needing by others, thanks to their diverse outlook. families, be it healthy newborns or children of all ages with special needs. D)People who have the ability to be open to new E) The phenomenon of adoption, ranging from healthy experiences process visual information in different newborns to children of all ages with special needs, ways to boost their creativity, so people with diverse constantly evolves to fit the needs of any children who outlook might be good at spotting solutions that others need families. overlook, thanks to this trait. E) People who are open to new experiences have the ability to process visual information in different ways and this helps boost their creativity, so people with this trait might be good at spotting solutions overlooked by others, thanks to their diverse outlook. 10 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 42. Vücudun akciğerleri koruyan mekanizmaları olmasına rağmen, akciğerlerde biriken birçok madde vardır ve bunlar akciğerlerde tekrarlayan iritasyona veya uzun süreli hastalığa yol açabilir. A) Although the body has mechanisms that protect the lungs, there are many substances that deposit in the lungs and these may cause recurrent irritation to the lungs or lead to long-term illness. B) Many substances can deposit in the lungs and cause recurring irritation to the lungs that leads to long-term illness even though various mechanisms of the body protect the lungs. C)Despite the protective mechanisms of the body, lots of substances may deposit in the lungs that can cause long-term illness by causing recurrent irritation to the lungs. D)Even if there are mechanisms of the body for the protection of the lungs, many substances may deposit in the lungs and lead to long-term illness as a result of recurring irritation. E) Although the body protects the lungs through various mechanisms, many substances can cause long-term illness by depositing in the lungs and leading to recurring irritation. 11 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. It can be understood from the passage that ----. A) the 1994 agreement attracted a lot of foreign investment to Azerbaijan Azerbaijan’s transformation is particularly impressive B) Azerbaijan’s economic development would have been considering that twenty-seven years ago it was involved impossible without Soviet aid in a deep political and economic crisis. Amid post-Soviet uncertainty, the economy was in free fall, with a severe C)Azerbaijan has become a preferred destination to contraction in output and growing inflation. The revival of which other countries export gas the country’s economy followed the introduction of a new oil strategy which encompassed a series of D)the country’s greatest challenge is how to best take production sharing agreements, and the opening of advantage of the Caspian Sea Azerbaijan’s historic oil sector to international investment. A 1994 agreement, hailed as the ‘contract E) the country’s new oil strategy is questionable, given of the century’, gave investors access to Azerbaijan’s the limited amount of foreign investment rich oil fields in the Caspian Sea. The resulting inflow of capital and expertise permanently altered the country’s fortunes. Large-scale production and the construction of multiple pipelines contributed to making Azerbaijan one of the world’s largest oil and gas exporters. Azerbaijan’s biggest challenge today is diversifying away from hydrocarbons (chemicals found in petrol and natural 45. The underlined word in the passage ‘hailed’ is gas), which represent more than 90 percent of the country’s total exports, a 60 percent increase from closest in meaning to ----. fifteen years ago. The country expects to capitalise on A)praised B)ignored C)recruited hydrocarbons for at least another forty years, but oil production is believed to have peaked and Azerbaijan D)ceased E)retained must do more for its non-oil economy. For the government this is a clear priority. 46. According to the passage, for further economic 43. It is clearly stated in the passage that more than a development Azerbaijan needs to ----. quarter of a century ago Azerbaijan ----. A) abandon hydrocarbons as soon as possible A) became a politically developed and economically competitive country B) revise the 1994 agreement to make it more profitable B) was entangled in serious administrative and financial difficulties C)seek other sources of income as alternatives for oil C)was in a problematic situation in terms of infrastructure D)focus on expanding the uses of oil and the range of and services markets where it is sold D)was economically and politically more stable but E) find more efficient ways of obtaining more oil from the suffered from rising inflation Caspian Sea E) experienced strong economic growth thanks to post-Soviet investors 12 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 47-50: Answer these questions according to the 48. It is stated in the passage that Jacques Derrida’s passage below. book Of Grammatology ----. A) is considered to be the cornerstone of his works Deconstruction – the method which claims there is no single explanation of the meaning of a piece of writing – B) has had a bigger influence on philosophy than the field in and of itself, is almost dead, but it retains enormous of literature influence on current critical thinking. While deconstruction itself peaked in the late 1970s, an C)was an important extension of the ideas of some evolving version of deconstruction has been absorbed French philosophers by later thinking and often remains crucial to, and even taken for granted by, contemporary cultural and literary D)dwells upon the ideas of such prominent thinkers like criticism. The founding figure and the intellectual force Einstein and Freud behind deconstruction was Jacques Derrida. His first widely influential book, Of Grammatology, appeared in E) was considerably influenced by other contexts and French in 1967, and many of his later writings recast or issues of his time extend the ideas of Of Grammatology for other contexts and issues. Advocates and popularisers saw his ideas as so revolutionary that they put him in the same light as Copernicus, Newton, Einstein, and Freud. Although Derrida was primarily a philosopher, his work had little impact on philosophy until after its shock wave hit literary studies. Deconstruction has since carried its 49. Derrida is seen in the same line with Copernicus, influence far beyond literary studies, not only to Newton, Einstein, and Freud because he ----. philosophy but also to all of the humanities and often to A) was their contemporary the social sciences. B) was as popular as they were C)influenced many other fields of study as they did D)had groundbreaking ideas like them 47. According to the passage, deconstruction lost its previous power ----. E) was also a philosopher A) because it could hardly evolve after its peak in the late 1970s B) long before the 1970s, when various different philosophical movements appeared C)and was forgotten for several years because of the 50. According to the passage, which of the following is obsolete ideas it promotes true about deconstruction? D)but still achieves a considerable impact on cultural and A) It has extended far beyond the boundaries of literary criticism humanities and social sciences. E) as a result of its excessive preoccupation with current B) It made literary studies more significant than others. cultural criticism C)It helped Derrida to become a literary critic. D)It was not fully appreciated in some fields of study. E) It has evolved over time and made its way to modern studies as well. 13 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 51-54: Answer these questions according to the 52. It is understood from the passage that the chemical passage below. dimethyl sulphide ----. A) plays an important role in decreasing the temperatures What goes around comes around. Our greenhouse gas on Earth emissions do not just warm the planet, they also acidify the oceans; however, it is a fact that most people are B) leads to acidification by reflecting sunlight back not aware of. Now it turns out that the changes in ocean chemistry they cause will feed back into the climate, C)is produced when marine plants reflect sunlight back further driving up temperatures. This was not always into space thought to be true. Climatologists had considered that carbon dioxide (CO ) absorbed by the ocean was D)is the direct result of acidification in the oceans 2 stored, and unable to affect the climate. But a study now suggests that the acidification it causes will rebound on E) is produced in less alkaline seawater the entire planet, by acting on tiny marine plants called phytoplankton. These plants produce a chemical called dimethyl sulphide (DMS) that drifts up into the air and reflects sunlight back into space, cooling the planet. Katharina Six and her team at the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology in Hamburg gathered experimental data showing that phytoplankton produce less DMS as 53. According to the data collected by Six and her team, seawater becomes less alkaline due to acidification. ----. After entering these figures into climate models, they estimate that 18 percent less DMS will be released from A) DMS released from the oceans will drop to 18 percent the oceans by the year 2100, compared to pre-industrial in 2100 times. If the concentration of CO in the atmosphere 2 B) climate models of pre-industrial times indicated 18 doubles, which is likely to happen later this century, percent less acidification temperatures are expected to rise between 2 and 4.5°C. Ocean acidification will add between 0.23 and 0.48°C to C)less production of DMS causes seawater to become that figure, Six estimates. less alkaline D)phytoplankton produced more DMS before industrialisation E) the rise in temperatures will be far more than 5°C later 51. According to the passage, greenhouse gas this century emissions ----. A) are mainly caused by the rise in acid levels in the oceans B) are responsible for changes in ocean chemistry C)enable oceans to absorb and store carbon dioxide 54. What is the main aim of the author of this passage? A) To prove that greenhouse gas emissions affect the D)are considered to be less harmful than the chemical climate more than acidification changes in oceans B) To reveal the major effects of temperature rise on the E) impact the temperatures less than they did in the past planet C)To inform the reader about a lesser-known effect of greenhouse gas emissions D)To tell people about the effects of industrialisation on the climate E) To give specific advice about cooling down the planet 14 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. It is pointed out in the passage that learning a new language ----. A) may help improve attention So far, only two types of mental exertion have been shown to improve or preserve overall cognitive ability. B) fixes several types of brain damages One is musical training. Experts state that listening to and making music is not only an auditory experience; it C)prevents various mental disorders is a multisensory and motor experience. Playing an instrument changes how the brain interprets and D)could strengthen motor skills integrates a wide range of sensory information, and making music over a long period of time can change E) improves sensory awareness brain function and brain structure. The other is to learn a new language. As for the role of language-learning in brain power, a study carried out among students revealed that attention gets better when a new language is studied intensively even if it is for a short time and it gets even better when more practice is done for longer. The results of the study confirm the cognitive benefits of language-learning and give important and warming 57. According to the passage, the study done on messages: firstly, even a short, intensive course can students shows that ----. show beneficial effects on some cognitive functions. A) it is possible to improve the brain even with a short, Secondly, this effect can be maintained through intensive course of language learning practice. So, we can say that it is never too late to start a mental activity such as learning a new language. B) those who start to learn a new language at a young age eliminate their risk of cognitive disability C)learning a new language requires more practice than playing an instrument 55. One can understand from the passage that playing a D)language learning can improve overall functioning of musical instrument ----. the brain when practised for a long time A) has a positive impact on how our brain responds to E) there are substantial benefits of language learning different stimuli when it is combined with musical training B) does not influence our brain functions when done temporarily C)is the best way of preserving cognitive ability D)has little impact on motor skills as it is an auditory 58. Which of the following best describes the author’s experience attitude towards learning a new language? E) does not have an instant impact on brain functions A)Encouraging B)Doubtful unlike listening to music C)Pessimistic D)Neutral E)Critical 15 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. What point does Richmond make about contamination in the passage? A) It affects invertebrates more than the larvae, flies and When we take medication, some can pass through us beetles if it stems from river-borne pharmaceuticals. intact and go down the toilet. Once in the sewers, these drugs are not removed during the treatment B) It can indirectly influence a wide range of predators process, and end up in the waterways. To find out how regardless of whether they live in water or not. pharmaceutical waste finds its way into aquatic C)It is caused mainly by 69 types of medication which creatures, Erinn Richmond at Monash University in are not properly absorbed by the body during Australia and her colleagues sampled flies, beetles, treatment. other insects and spiders from six waterways in the greater Melbourne region. Overall, the group detected D)It occurs as a result of high anti-depressant 69 medications in the invertebrates. Organisms near consumption in more clean and wealthy districts. wastewater plants contained the highest levels, but low levels were also detected in those from more pristine E) It can have deadly effects, especially on platypuses areas. Richmond presumes river-borne pharmaceuticals and trout as they eat waste polluted by probably accumulate in flies and beetles while they are anti-depressants. underwater larvae, then transfer to spiders that feed on them after they emerge as adults. Other predators in the food web such as fish, platypuses, birds, bats and frogs may also become cross-contaminated, she says. Her team calculated that trout and platypuses feeding on insects near wastewater plants would consume anti-depressant doses up to half the level normally 61. It is stated in the passage that anti-depressants ----. prescribed to humans. The impacts of this are not certain, but previous studies have found that high-level A) can impact the way male and female spiders interact exposure to anti-depressants causes fish to become less with each other vigilant about avoiding predators. Male birds also seem B) can make fish more vulnerable to attack as prey to sing less to females when exposed to the drugs. C)can have similar side effects on platypuses as they have on humans D)have failed to produce noticeable effects on invertebrates 59. It can be understood from the passage that medicine ----. E) have more adverse effects on underwater animals than A) may not be very effective if it is recycled from other medication pharmaceutical waste B) eliminated in the treatment stage still poses a hazard to aquatic creatures and insects C)is likely to threaten some animal populations in water when it reaches waterways without being 62. What could be the best title for this passage? destroyed A) How to Detect Medications in Underwater Creatures D)gives harm to only aquatic creatures whose habitats are confined to areas surrounding wastewater plants B) Optional Wastewater Treatment Strategies E) turns into pharmaceutical waste when it is consumed C)River Pollution Caused by Wastewater Plants more than the recommended amount D)When Medications Become a Contaminant E) Which Medical Waste Does Affect Invertebrates? 16 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 63-67: For these questions, choose the best 64. Eleanor: option to complete the dialogue.  I wonder what might happen if human beings disappeared. 63. Sebastian: Chidi:  Preparing tasty meals in the woods is a wonderful  Well, I was reading an article about it and it thought. But somehow it’s easy to go overboard said plant and animal species that have formed with backpacking menus. You think you must close bonds with humanity are the most likely to pack this in order to eat that and you need all the suffer. other items to prepare it properly. Eleanor: Graham:  How is that?  That’s silly. What the body needs is simple. It needs water more than anything else. In fact, you Chidi: can survive without food for at least a week.  ---- Sebastian: Eleanor:  ----  I see. So, this probably means they will be outcompeted by other plants and the animals that Graham: feed on them will probably vanish too.  Almost anything you eat out there is going to A) To be honest, I’m not sure, but one theory holds that taste great because you will be very hungry and, intelligent life developed because it helped our after all, you’re outdoors! ancestors to survive the environmental shocks that A) I don’t think I’m alone on this one, but energy bars, they had experienced. fruit and trail mix will keep you going. B) You know the crops that feed the world are reliant on B) Think about it: No cooking, no clean up and less to fertilisers that we use. When we are gone, fertilisers carry on your back. will not be used, and those plants might be replaced by their wild forebears. C)Well then, what do you suggest I put into my backpack C)The animals that were closer to us helped individuals so as not to starve out there? and themselves to reproduce in large social groups. This was proof enough that they had good genes. D)You think so? Don’t you think I should try something less risky then? D)The decades following human extinction will be of devastating oil spills, chemical leaks and explosions of E) Needless to say, you must have water on a regular varying sizes. I mean all the ticking bombs that basis or the body breaks down. humanity has left behind. E) I can say traces of humankind will remain, even millions of years after our end. For instance, microbes will need lots of time to consume all the plastics we've left behind. 17 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 65. Scott: 66. Alison:  On my geography course, we are learning about  Did you know that oysters are used to mitigate capital cities of Europe. Can you name any of coastal erosion and flooding due to the rise in sea these cities? levels? Debbie: Kyle:  The one I’m thinking of is Budapest, the capital of  ---- Hungary. Where did the name 'Budapest' come from, by the way? Alison:  But those efforts have detrimental effects on Scott: near-shore habitats. Constructing breakwater  ---- reefs from oysters has been found to support a higher abundance and different communities of Debbie: fishes.  Wow! I didn’t know that. So the history of the name 'Budapest' is much simpler than I had Kyle: expected it would be.  To be honest, I’d never have imagined that A) I’m not sure where the name comes from, but we can oysters could be used to protect shorelines. search it on the Internet to find out. A) I know it’s forcing many to migrate to higher ground and leaving millions at risk of demise. B) The name of the capital city has always been Budapest. If you study the history of Hungary, this is B) There are breakwaters and seawalls already in use to one fact you will learn. prevent such incidences. C)Budapest is made up of two cities separated by the C)I think certain measures have to be implemented to Danube River. One town was Buda and the other control oyster harvesting. Pest; when the cities were merged, so were their names. D)I don’t think oysters would be resilient enough to withstand major changes in sea levels. D)Good question! When I asked my Hungarian friends about it, they told me there are some myths about its E) To protect the oyster reefs, there must be a system to origin but they're all just myths anyway. ensure their sustainability. E) Well, someone with a sense of humour claimed it had something to do with the Buddha, but just because they sound the same doesn’t mean they are related! 18 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Paul: rephrased form of the given sentence.  We’ll need to be careful about not getting Dengue Fever on our Central American tour. Sarah: 68. The story of King Solomon meeting the Queen of  What’s Dengue Fever? I’ve never heard of that. Sheba inspired a rich literary tradition across Jewish, Christian and Islamic texts, although the Paul: geographic origins of the story still puzzle scholars  It’s some sort of viral infection spread by to this day. mosquitoes. A) Still confusing scholars about where it took place, the story of the meeting between King Solomon and the Sarah: Queen of Sheba gave rise to a rich literary tradition  Well, that’s definitely not something I want to get. throughout Jewish, Christian and Islamic texts. How about we just stay in larger cities so that we avoid mosquito-infested areas? B) The geographic origins of the story of King Solomon meeting the Queen of Sheba remain a mystery for Paul: scholars, although they acknowledge its impact on the  ---- rich literary tradition across Jewish, Christian and Islamic texts. Sarah:  Then let’s read up on how to prevent mosquito C)The scholars studying the rich literary tradition in bites to avoid getting bitten in the first place. Jewish, Christian and Islamic texts still remain confused about the story and geographic origins of the A) In truth, mosquitoes usually bite during the daytime meeting between King Solomon and the Queen of and are often found indoors. Sheba. B) Well, Dengue Fever usually causes flu-like ptoms, D)While inspired by the story of the meeting that took including fever, muscle and joint pains, nausea and place between the King Solomon and the Queen of vomiting. Sheba, scholars are still confused about the geographic origins of rich traditional Jewish, Christian C)In fact, the guide book says there are some amazing and Islamic texts. cities along our tour so I’m absolutely on board with that idea. E) The story of King Solomon meeting the Queen of Sheba has prompted scholars to create a rich literary D)Actually, since mosquitoes breed in artificial water tradition in Jewish, Christian and Islamic texts, but the containers like thrown away jars and cans, it’s only thing that has still not been clarified is the exact common in populated urban areas. location of this meeting. E) Apparently, treatment involves pain killers, plenty of fluids and even hospitalisation if it’s severe. 19 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 69. As people age, the ability of white blood cells to deal 70. With bodies rarely above 15 cm long, tarsiers are with infections and respond to vaccinations one of the world’s smallest meat-eating primates declines, opening the door for illness or living off largely insects, reptiles and birds. inflammation that can lead to chronic disease over A) Just as tarsiers have small bodies mainly under 15 cm time. in length, they feed off mainly insects, reptiles and A) When people age, chronic diseases caused by illness birds as the smallest carnivore primate. and inflammation increase because white blood cells dealing with infections and responding to vaccinations B) Tarsiers, which have bodies barely longer than 15 cm, diminish in number over time. are among the tiniest carnivorous primates consuming mostly insects, reptiles and birds. B) As people age, white blood cells to deal with infections and respond to vaccinations lose their strength, and C)Since tarsiers are under 15 cm in length and they have this causes chronic diseases accompanied with illness meat in their diet like insects, reptiles and birds, they and inflammation. are one of the world’s smallest meat-eating primates. C)While aging, people lose the ability to deal with D)Living among mostly insects, reptiles and birds, infections and respond to vaccinations due to the tarsiers are one of the few tiny carnivorous primates decline in their white blood cells, that is why chronic and have a body that is barely more than 15 cm in diseases due to inflammation increase over time. length. D)As people age, white blood cells lose the strength to E) Tarsiers are one of the world’s smallest primates that deal with infections as well as respond to vaccinations, prefer meat in the form of mainly insects, reptiles and and this may cause illness or inflammation that leads birds whose bodies are rarely above 15 cm long. to chronic disease as time progresses. E) Illness and inflammation can lead to chronic diseases as people age and this is because of the white blood cells’ incapacity to deal with infections and respond to vaccinations over time. 20 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 72-75: For these questions, choose the best 71. While the growth of cities may be associated with option to complete the missing part of the increasing prosperity, urban areas demonstrate the passage. world’s most obvious health disparities in both low- and high-income countries. 72. Many ancient Greek writers told of a race of women A) The largest disparities in health are observed in both warriors who were descended from Ares, the god of low- and high-income countries due to increasing war, and the nymph Harmonia. They were said to prosperity that is connected to the growth of cities. live without men, wear masculine clothing, and spend their days hunting, farming, and above all B) As a result of the growth of cities with the purpose of fighting. ---- Researchers have only found traces of creating more wealth, both low- and high-income a people, the Sauromatians, whose women hunted countries have developed urban areas with health inequalities in the world. and fought alongside their men. Nevertheless, the myth of the Amazons was popular; classical writers C)Both low- and high-income countries are experiencing repeated the tales, and artists portrayed the Amazon the most obvious problem of health inequalities as the women prominently in their art. growth of cities has produced increasing wealth in A) In fact, they were placed in variety of geographical urban areas. locations, the most mentioned of which is an area near the Black Sea. D)It is possible to link the growth of cities to more wealth; however, urban areas both in low- and high-income B) However, there has been no archaeological evidence countries are places with the most apparent health that proves the existence of such a tribe of women inequalities in the world. warriors. E) The growth of cities is linked to an increase in C)Thus, the women were believed to be the fighters, prosperity as long as there is the apparent issue of rulers, and administrators; the men, looked after the urban health discrepancies in both low- and home and reared the children. high-income countries of the world. D)So, Amazonian customs generated attention from ancient authors who were drawn to speculations about exotic women. E) Moreover, for most of the writers, the Amazons lived not only far away but also in a distant time usually before or during the Trojan War. 21 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 73. Toxic behaviour is common in the workplace. In 74. Misinformation is perhaps an inevitable part of the part, it grows from selfishness and callousness that world we live in, but it is not a new problem. ---- can manifest in extreme form from certain character Deceiving others can offer an apparent opportunity disorders that do not recede after work hours and to gain strategic advantage, to motivate others to are particularly destructive to interpersonal action, or to even protect interpersonal bonds. relationships. ---- The spirit of the times plays a role Moreover, people inadvertently have been sharing as well. Periods of cultural turbulence, instability inaccurate information with one another for and uncertainty tend to stimulate and release hostile thousands of years. However, we currently live in an behaviours that play on the fears of others. Whether era in which technology enables information to it turns up in the conference room or the home, reach large audiences distributed across the globe, toxic behaviour has a negative emotional impact and thus the potential for immediate and beyond its immediate cause. widespread effects from misinformation now looms A) Toxic behaviour can also be the product of work larger than in the past. environments where productivity is the only measure A) People have likely told lies to one another for roughly for success or where there is an atmosphere of as long as verbal communication has existed. mistrust. B) Yet, certain patterns of communication and the B) A toxic boss behaves like a dictator whose rudeness is facilitated spread of information might solve this matched by bullying and the implementation of other problem. offensive actions towards workers. C)Indeed, misinformation is concerning because of its C)Toxic behaviour does not just inflict personal harm, it potential to unduly influence attitudes and behaviour. attacks the systematic well-being of entire groups and organisations alike. D)From an ethical perspective, many people worry most about the active promotion of misinformation. D)People who are subjected to toxic behaviour as a target can be adversely physically affected in the E) However, media systems do not censor many types of long-term. it before being put in content made available to audiences. E) Nearly half of all workers in one poll in 1998 reported they were treated rudely at least once a week; a number which increased to 62% in 2016. 22 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 75. Adaptive Business Intelligence (ABI) is the sentence in the passage. discipline of combining prediction, optimisation, and adaptability into a system capable of answering these two fundamental questions: “What is likely to happen in the future?” and “What is the best 76. (I) Commercial transactions are one of the most decision right now?” To build such a system, we fundamental uses of the Internet and can seem like one first need to understand the methods and of the simplest. (II) Services are bought and sold on a similar basis to physical transactions. (III) Effective techniques that enable prediction, optimisation, and automated recommendation systems have been a adaptability. At first glance, this subject matter is priority for online retailers to understand, predict and nothing new, as hundreds of books and articles profit from their users’ behaviour. (IV) And with retail have been written on business intelligence, goods, much as in many shops or catalogues, items are prediction methods, optimisation techniques, and selected, paid for and then delivery is arranged –either so forth. ---- ABI addresses this very issue. by post, in the case of physical goods, or via download. A) This popular statement has been around for years as (V)Behind this, however, lies an administrative and business managers stored massive amounts of data in logistical network of immense complexity, above all the belief that they contain valuable insight. when it comes to processing financial transactions, ensuring data security and dealing with the proliferating B) Moreover, recent research in psychology indicates forces of fraud and scamming. widely held beliefs can actually hamper the A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V decision-making process. C)The concept of adaptability is certainly gaining popularity, and not just in the software sector; it can be seen in running shoes or Internet search engines. D)However, none of these has explained how to combine these various technologies into a software system capable of predicting, optimising, and adapting. 77. (I) Brain activity measurements conducted by the University of Ontario showed a clear neurological E) These products are very appealing for individual difference between being present at a show and seeing consumers, because, despite their mass production, it on screen. (II)There was far more ‘synchrony’ in the they are capable of adapting to the preferences of brain waves of those who physically attended a live each unique owner. performance, suggesting greater enjoyment and a stronger sense of connectedness with the music and the people around them.(III)Audiences of virtual gigs are provided with the opportunity of multiple camera angles to choose from, the option of broadcasting their applause and the access to a live chat to make them feel the atmosphere. (IV)But a concert’s impact is not limited to short-term sensory thrills, or pleasurable tricks that live music can play on your mind. (V) Attending concerts lowers the secretion of stress hormone ‘cortisol’ while increasing levels of a steroid called DHEA, which is associated with enhanced immune function, lower cholesterol and improved muscle deposition. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 23 Go on to the next page 2021-YDS/2/ENGLISH 78. (I) It is little surprise studies have suggested that being 80. (I) Albert Einstein predicted the existence of gravitational bilingual can help you learn a new language. (II) This waves almost 100 years ago as a result of his general could be as bilingual people realise that there is no theory of relativity. (II) With the discovery of other intrinsic link between a word and its meaning. (III)Some galaxies beyond the Milky Way, scientific perception of linguists have also theorised there are differences the universe had suddenly grown. (III) The German-born between brains of polyglots (people who speak more theoretical physicist had said any accelerating mass than one language) and monolinguals (those who speak should produce ripples in the fabric of space-time that only one).(IV)Some people worry that bringing up a propagate at the speed of light, which essentially means child bilingually means they end up not speaking any that a change in gravity will spread as waves or ripples language ‘properly’. (V)However, the neuroscience through space. (IV) But decades of searching for behind this is not clear: researchers are still not in full evidence had drawn a frustrating blank. (V) Yet, on 11 agreement whether different languages are stored and February 2016, it was announced that physicists at the accessed together or separately in the brain. Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory had sensed, for the very first time, a wave emanating A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V from a fraction-of-a-second collision of two black holes located 1.3 billion light years away. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 79. (I)For almost 40 years, our nearest cosmic neighbour, the Moon, was left alone as we looked somewhere else in the Solar System.(II)That changed in 2013, when China’s Chang’e 3 lander touched down on the lunar surface. (III)Since then there has been an explosion of interest in the Moon.(IV) The search for water as a source of life even on the Moon is a constant point of focus in the context of human exploration. (V)NASA, China and even private companies are racing back to it, with dozens of robotic and human missions being planned. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V END OF THE TEST 24 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS 2021 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI - 2 2021 - YDS/2 10-10-2021 1. B 48. A 2. D 49. D 3. A 50. E 4. B 51. B 5. C 52. A 6. E 53. D 7. C 54. C 8. C 55. A 9. E 56. A 10. B 57. A 11. C 58. A 12. C 59. C 13. C 60. B 14. A 61. B 15. D 62. D 16. E 63. C 17. E 64. B 18. C 65. C 19. C 66. B 20. E 67. D 21. D 68. A 22. B 69. D 23. C 70. B 24. A 71. D 25. D 72. B 26. E 73. A 27. A 74. A 28. C 75. D 29. A 76. C 30. A 77. C 31. D 78. D 32. B 79. D 33. E 80. B 34. C 35. D 36. B 37. B 38. D 39. D 40. E 41. A 42. A 43. B 44. A 45. A 46. C 47. D T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) (Sonbahar Dönemi) 1 EYLÜL 2013 PAZAR İNGİLİZCE ÖRNEK SORU KİTAPÇIĞI Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S AÇIKLAMA Ö 1. Bu soru kitapçığındaki test 80 sorudan oluşmaktadır. 5. Bu sınavın değerlendirilmesi doğru cevap sayısı üzerinden yapılacak, yanlış cevaplar dikkate alın- mayacaktır. 2. Bu test için verilen cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır (2.5 saat). 6. Cevaplamaya istediğiniz sorudan başlayabilirsiniz. Bir 3. Bu kitapçıktaki testte yer alan her sorunun sadece bir soru ile ilgili cevabınızı, cevap kâğıdında o soru için ay- doğru cevabı vardır. Bir soru için birden çok cevap yeri rılmış olan yere işaretlemeyi unutmayınız. işaretlenmişse o soru yanlış cevaplanmış sayılacaktır. 4. İşaretlediğiniz bir cevabı değiştirmek istediğinizde, sil- 7. Sınavda uyulacak diğer kurallar bu kitapçığın arka ka- me işlemini çok iyi yapmanız gerektiğini unutmayınız. pağında belirtilmiştir. 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE İNGİLİZCE Bu testte 80 soru vardır. 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere 4. Psychologists have shown that people can make ---- uygun düşen sözcük ya da ifadeyi bulunuz. of age, income and even personality traits based on fooMtwear alone. 1. Parents should teach their children that being patient with someone does not necessarily mean A) regularities B)incentives they have to ---- their inappropriate behaviour. C)requisites D)tendencies A) do away with B)look down on E) estimates C)put up with D)get up to E) come out of Y 5. The rapid growth of English as an international language has ---- a number of interesting discussions about the status of English today. 2. Paracetamol, one of the most effective painkillers used today, was discovered in the 1890s, but ---- A) confirmed B)postponed how it relieves pain remains a mystery. C)stimulated D)weakened A) adversely B)precisely S E) distinguished C)increasingly D)comparatively E) mistakenly 6. Because trade among nations is so important in economic development, most countries are ---- to be able to sell their goods and services in foreign Ö3. There is a wide range of theories that attempt to ---- markets. the differences in left- and right-handedness, some with much more empirical support than others. A) insufficient B)inconsistent A) carry out B)take over C)entitled D)vulnerable C)refer to D)account for E) eager E) give away 1 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere 10. Adopting a positive attitude to a terrible experience uygun düşen sözcük ya da ifadeyi bulunuz. can ---- enhance accuracy in emotional memories ---- diminish their negative overtones. 7. Scientists in the US ---- the rivers, streams and floods of ice at the Antarctic, ---- a fascinating A) just / as B)both / and picture of a constantly shifting continent. C)as / as D)rather / than A) have mapped / painting M E) so / that B) mapped / having been painted C) had mapped / being painted D) are mapping / painted E) will be mapping / having painted 11. When we think of war films, we often think of places like Vietnam and Europe, ---- the location for these films is generally the United States. YA) only if B)as C)but D)given that 8. ---- certain conceptual strategies can be learned, specific levels of cognitive development must be E) thus achieved in early childhood education. A) In case B)Now that C)Unless SD)Before 12. In a workplace, standardization of skills involves E) Just as considerable training of personnel ---- they can carry out organizational policies with few faults. A) because B)whereas C)even though D)as if 9. A report by the Japanese government ---- that the Ödisaster in 2011 at the Fukushima Nuclear Plant ----. E) so that A) has revealed / needs to be foreseen B) can reveal / should have been foreseen C) could reveal / will be foreseen 13. Dolphins use half their brain ---- sleep, as it gives D) reveals / must be foreseen them the ability to be on the lookout ---- danger while still technically sleeping. E) revealed / could have been foreseen A) during / for B)in / by C)at / into D)on / against E) through / from 2 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 14. The discovery that the Universe ---- at an accelerating rate ---- two rival teams of scientists a Nobel Prize in Physics. A) could expand / should have earned B) was expanding / must have earned M C) will be expanding / had earned D) is expanding / has earned E) ought to expand / may have earned 15. ---- all the essential amino acids for healtYh and an excellent source of vitamin D, cheese is a highly nutritious food which should be included ---- any healthy diet. A) For / at B)Under / to C)Of / from D)With / in E)SUpon / by 16. The crimes of the rich and the powerful can be explained ---- the same motives as any other Ö criminal act. A) in terms of B)prior to C)apart from D)in spite of E) instead of 3 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük ya da 19. ifadeyi bulunuz. A)in spite of B)as well as C)as opposed to Walk into any fast-food restaurant, and you can watch a small crowd of ordinary people doing something that is (17)----irrational: eating junky, excess-weight-inviting D)as a result of E)owing to food likely to leave them feeling bad about their bodies and open(18)----a host of serious illnesses. We literally M trade our health with self-image for a few minutes of pleasant mouth feel and belly comfort, as the latter is right here, right now,(19)----the former, which is months, years and decades away. This foolish exchange reflects a problem in our brains that may cause more damage in our lives and in society than any other.(20)----as ‘temporal discounting’, it is our tendency to view small rewards available now as more desirable than even much bigger benefits down the road. Scientists think this 20. trait may have been programmed into us by evolution at a time(21)----the environment, with its many threats to A) To know B)Known our survival, favoured those who grabbed wYhatever they could whenever they could get it. C)To have known D)Having known E) To be known S 17. A) similarly B)competitively C)compulsorily D)incidentally 21. E) utterly A) when B)if Ö C)unless D)although E) but 18. A)with B)to C)in D)by E)off 4 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük ya da 24. ifadeyi bulunuz. A) could have saved B)must save In 1896, Dr. Emil Kraepelin observed that many of the children of his schizophrenic patients werea little C)can save D)should have saved different in character and behaviour from their peers, beginning in early childhood. The evidence in recent E) used to save studies(22)---- Kraepelin’s observation that a significant M number of individuals later diagnosed(23)---- schizophrenia display some common and often peculiar traits and experiences as children and adolescents. Knowing risk factor and warning signs(24)---- many children from being diagnosed too late for the most effective treatment. With autism,(25)----,the American Academy of Paediatrics has issued guidelines for parents and physicians as a result of lobbying efforts by autism advocacy organizations.Parents are to watch for possible problems(26)----a baby avoiding eye contact, 25. being slow to babble, or developmental issues. YA) consequently B)for example C)in short D)otherwise E) unfortunately 22. A) gives in SB)backs up C)gets through D)leaves out E) fights down 26. A) due to B)despite Ö C)besides D)such as E) unlike 23. A)with B)for C)in D)by E)at 5 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde 30. In trying to understand the development of tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. language, ----. 27. ----, but the remains they recovered early on held A) human language utilizes a fairly small number of little information about the birds they came from. sounds A) The fossil record of penguins began to improve in B) the grammar of a language represents the linguistic the late 1970s M knowledge or capacity of its speakers B) Geographic distribution of penguins reflects a single C) our curiosity about ourselves has also led to point of origin near South America numerous theories about language origin C) The very first penguin fossil to be identified was a D) language is a part of our essential human nature and single bone found in New Zealand was never invented D) Scientists have known about fossil penguins for E) scholars, for ages, have been debating the role more than 150 years played by the vocal tract and the ear E) Penguins are weird birds in that they cannot fly and are instead proficient swimmers 31. Thanks to vaccinations, antibiotics, sanitation and Y better parental care, ----. 28. Even if we were to stabilize greenhouse gas A) age is the biggest risk factor for common deadly emissions today, ----. illnesses A) the rising temperature trend that we are witnessing B) today, we are much more likely to die in old age than today might destabilize automobile emissions in our youth B) this problem can be attributed to the variations in the C) a high childhood death rate is still a fact in most of output of the Sun the African states S C) both temperatures and sea levels would continue to D) an infant born today is not luckier than their rise for many hundred years grandparents D) some environmental problems are the results of E) it would not be reasonable to have high expectations centuries of pollution to live longer and healthier E) we cannot immediately stop various global cultural phenomena that are in action 32. Some sorts of music strike us with their perfection, Ö ----. 29. ----, diets that include a variety of healthy food are A) as everyone cannot get the same pleasure from a more likely to produce long-term results. certain kind of music A) Now that there has been a recent decline in fat B) though we may have difficulty identifying what consumption in Turkey over the short term emotion they express B) Unless we develop reasonable and healthy eating C) while reggae is a music style which is completely patterns responsibility-free for the society C) Although restricting or eliminating a food category is D) but artists can organize their work in such a way that nutritionally unwise only a group of people enjoy it D) Due to the fact that a vegetarian diet is a good E) thus there is no reason to think that things stand choice for some people but not for others differently with artwork E) Whether they are part of a formal weight-loss program or a personal attempt 6 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 33. ----, few realize how changes to their sleep pattern 36. How responsibilities are planned and handled is can have a significant effect as well. changing in many companies ----. A) When a bad night’s sleep ruins the whole day of a A) due to the latest technological tools that are person available B) Once sleepless people seek a solution by taking B) although starting a new job may offer great drugs to overcome insomnia opportunities M C) Because doctors prescribe medicine to regulate C) whereas telemarketing is rapidly growing its sales sleeping patterns of the elderly force D) Though many insomniacs have been seriously D) as opposed to buyers who demand technological advised to cut out drinks containing caffeine innovation E) While most people appreciate how their health is E) when some salespeople are expected to be tied to their diet and exercise marketing managers 34. Because the relationship between government and Y business is complex, where so much changes so rapidly, ----. A) newsletters were produced for smooth exchanges of information between the two B) highly specialized publications serve such industries as petroleum, aerospace and electronics C) some modest-looking newsletters may carry a S subscription price tag of hundreds of dollars D) the subscriber pays for the information, not necessarily the literary style or production values E) further need arises for swift, expert and specialized media to explain the latest developments Ö35. ----, they develop non-verbal communication with others. A) If some people have serious problems due to psychological disorders B) As deaf people are actually slightly more prone to auditory hallucinations C) Unless people can successfully internalize their thoughts D) Before children acquire language as infants and produce their first words E) As long as extremely shy personalities lack interaction even with their family members 7 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye 39. Fetihten iki yıl sonra, 1455’te, Fatih Sultan anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye Mehmet’in emriyle İstanbul’da ilk defa nüfus sayımı anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. yapılmıştır. 37. Paul Fisher, an economist with an interest in science, left his mark in the business world by A) The first census in Istanbul was taken in 1455, as designing a better ballpoint pen. Mehmed the Conquerer ordered it just two years after the conquest. A) Daha iyi bir tükenmez kalem tasarlayan iktisatçı Paul M Fisher, iş dünyasında fen bilimlerine katkısıyla adını B) 1455 is the year that the first census in Istanbul was duyurmuştur. carried out as a result of Mehmed the Conquerer’s order. B) İş dünyasında iz bırakan iktisatçı Paul Fisher, daha iyi bir tükenmez kalem tasarlamayı, fen bilimlerine C) In 1455, about two years after Istanbul’s conquest, ilgisi sayesinde başarmıştır. Mehmed the Conquerer ordered the first census to be taken. C) Fen bilimlerine ilgisiyle tanınan iktisatçı Paul Fisher, daha iyi bir tükenmez kalem tasarlayarak iş D) In 1455, two years after the conquest, upon the dünyasında adından söz ettirmiştir. order of Mehmed the Conquerer, the first census in Istanbul was carried out. D) Fen bilimlerine ilgi duyan bir iktisatçı olan Paul Y Fisher, daha iyi bir tükenmez kalem tasarlayarak iş E) It was Mehmed the Conquerer who ordered to have dünyasında iz bırakmıştır. the first census carried out in Istanbul in 1455, two years after the conquest. E) Paul Fisher, fen bilimlerine ilgi duyan bir iktisatçı olarak daha iyi bir tükenmez kalem tasarlamış ve böylece iş dünyasında adını duyurmuştur. 40. Dil eğitiminde toplumsal sınıf farklılıklarını doğrudan inceleyen en verimli araştırma, İngiliz sosyolog Basil Bernstein’inkidir. 38. Yeni Zelanda’da bir ineğin doğal olarak yağsız süt S üretme becerisi ile doğduğunu keşfeden bilim A) The most fruitful research dealing directly with insanları, bu tür inekleri nasıl çoğaltmak gerektiğini language education in terms of social-class anlamak için çalışıyorlar. differences belongs to the English sociologist Basil Bernstein. A) Born with the ability to produce natural non-fat milk, a cow in New Zealand is being examined by B) Basil Bernstein, who is an English sociologist, has scientists to find out how to breed such cows. dealt directly with social-class differences in language education and has come up with fruitful research. ÖB) It was discovered that a cow in New Zealand was born able to produce natural non-fat milk, so C) The most fruitful research dealing directly with scientists there are now trying to investigate ways of social-class differences in language education is that breeding such cows. of the English sociologist Basil Bernstein. C) A cow in New Zealand was able to produce non-fat milk naturally, which encouraged scientists there to D) The English sociologist Basil Bernstein has done investigate ways of breeding such cows. fruitful research dealing directly with social-class differences in language education. D) A cow, which was born in New Zealand, was discovered to be able to produce non-fat milk E) The most fruitful research dealing directly with naturally, thus scientists there have been trying to social-class differences in language education was find out ways to breed such cows. done by the English sociologist Basil Bernstein. E) Having discovered that a cow in New Zealand was born with the ability to produce non-fat milk naturally, scientists are studying to figure out how to breed such cows. 8 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 41. Make-up artists prepare actors’ faces and bodies for the stage to effectively reflect the physical properties of the characters to be played. A) Makyözler, canlandırılacak karakterlerin fiziksel özelliklerini etkili bir biçimde yansıtmak için oyuncuların yüzünü ve vücudunu sahne için hazırlar. M B) Makyözler, oyuncuların yüzünü ve vücudunu hazırlayarak, canlandırılacak karakterlerin fiziksel özelliklerinin sahnede etkili bir şekilde yansıtılmasını sağlar. C) Makyözler, canlandırılacak karakterlerin fiziksel özelliklerini etkili bir şekilde yansıtabilmek için oyuncuların yüzünü ve vücudunu sahneye hazırlayan kişilerdir. D) Makyözler, canlandırılacak karakterlerinY fiziksel özellikleri sahnede tam anlamıyla yansıtılmak istendiği için oyuncuların yüzünü ve vücudunu etkili bir şekilde hazırlar. E) Makyözler, canlandırılacak karakterlerin fiziksel özelliklerini istenilen şekilde yansıtmak amacıyla oyuncuların yüzünü ve vücudunu sahne için etkili hâle getirir. S 42. People who apply for professional assistance in coping with stress and pain are generally individuals whose strategies have proven ineffective in managing their problems. A) Sorunlarını çözmek için geliştirdikleri yöntemler yetersiz kalan bireyler, genellikle stres ve ağrıyla Öbaşa çıkma konusunda uzman desteğine başvururlar. B) Stres ve ağrıyla başa çıkmada uzman desteğine başvuran bireyler, genellikle sorunlarını çözmek için kullandıkları yöntemler yetersiz kalan kişilerdir. C) Stres ve ağrı ile başa çıkmak için uzman desteğine başvuranlar, genellikle sorunlarını çözmek için yetersiz yöntemler geliştiren kişilerden oluşmaktadır. D) Bireyler, sorunlarını halletmek için kullandıkları yöntemler yetersiz kaldığında stres ve ağrıyla başa çıkmak için genellikle uzman desteğine başvururlar. E) Bireyler, sorunlarına çare bulma konusunda gereken yöntemleri etkin olarak kullanamadıklarında stres ve ağrıyla başa çıkmak için genellikle uzman desteğine başvururlar. 9 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. According to the passage, those in favour of cevaplayınız. globalization think that----. Globalization is reflected in certain areas of life such as A) cultural integration helps people tolerate the culture and lifestyle. Modern mass media and increased negative impacts of globalization mobility favour a sort of cultural globalization. African cooking and Indian films have become as common in B) the concept of a world society is far from being Europe as Western fast food is in Asia or Hollywood achieved soon M films in the Middle East. Optimists see this mingling of world societies as a chance to integrate ‘the foreign’ into C) blending cultures is a way to develop a better one’s own cultural value system and in this way to understanding of one another increase mutual tolerance. Growing commonalities in D) the reason for globalization is more about economics the sense of a recognized universal value system, such than culture as human rights, can develop in this way. This perspective presupposes free access to information and E) cultural integration may harm local cultural value knowledge. In contrast, critics emphasize the economic systems around the globe dominance of rich industrial nations in the media, through which they force their Western model of affluence on the weaker countries for their own 45. As stated in the passage, the critics of globalization economic advantage. The general commercYialization believe that ----. and reshaping of national or regional cultures through foreign influences have, in many parts of the world, A) globalization is for the benefit of the developed world provoked mass movements seeking a return to their rather than the poorer nations own traditional values. One can trace the radical anti-Western movements back to these perceived B) the media can help the poorer nations learn from the causes. The emphasis on regional, local, and new developed ones nationalist thinking can partly be seen as a reaction to globalization. C) the effects of globalization are confined to the financial aspects of life S D) globalization prevents industrial nations from preserving their local traditions E) globalization cannot be beneficial for regional cultures due to a lack of access to information 43. It is obvious from the passage that ----. A) reactions to the Western world result from regional 46. One can infer from the passage that ----. Öprotests A) the richer and poorer nations of the world uniformly B) today, much of the modern mass media is shaped affect each other by cultural globalization B) globalization is a controversial issue with both its C) modern mass media are in opposition to some advocates and opponents cultural effects of globalization C) the impact of globalization has produced a one-sided D) Indian films hardly receive enough attention in reaction Europe unlike those produced in the West D) globalization itself can explain why new nationalist E) protesters against globalization are opposed to thinking has recently gained importance foreign influences on local cultures E) both the rich and poor are equally affected by the negative aspects of globalization 10 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. It is stated in the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A) designing the invitations is the primary task of the As an event planner who conceives, designs and event planner orchestrates every type of event from corporate affairs to weddings, it is my responsibility to put together and B) the scope of event-planning is so enormous as to manage the individual creative teams that are include alternative ways of reaching a venue contributing to the occasions. Together, we do everything from selecting the perfect invitations to C)Mworking with creative people helps tackle challenges before they result in big problems installing temporary roads in order to provide access to an event. One of the greatest challenges of my job, yet D) the valuable input of the creative teams stems from one of its most rewarding aspects, is working with their comprehension of the job’s importance creative people on a day-to-day basis. I deal with a lot of high-profile, artistic individuals – people who are E) creative teams are directed by a person selected by extremely knowledgeable and well-known in their own the event planner right. They are passionate and talented individuals who often have their own vision of how they want particular elements of events designed and executed. Therein lies 49. According to the passage, the main challenge of the challenge. As the event producer, it is again my working with artistic individuals is that they ----. responsibility to keep everyone focused on tYhe overall concept and design and to work with each team leader A) demand too much time to finish what is expected to ensure that the teams move forward in the same from them direction, all while minimizing difficulties and catastrophes. When you are working with creative B) want to have the event organized according to their personnel, it is crucial to keep them on track so that they own preferences will not disrupt the project’s rhythm and production schedule. For me, this means taking on a very active C) often create problems that are almost impossible to management role. overcome SD) have a reputation of being difficult to communicate with E) may ignore the suggestions of the event planner 47. According to the passage, ----. 50. It can be understood from the passage that ----. A) all leaders working with the event planner have the A) it is the team leader’s responsibility to develop an Öopportunity to shine overall concept for an event B) the event planner is incapable of executing all the B) corporate companies may sometimes seem elements of an event without taking feedback from unwilling to organize their affairs with the help of the the clients event planner C) the event planner ensures harmonious cooperation C) if a team leader cannot adapt to the dynamics of a between teams which focus on various aspects of certain group, he or she is transferred to another one the event D) each team of experts works independently because D) the author enjoys the challenge of working with of their different job specifications well-known artistic individuals E) the diverse individual personalities of the team E) every team leader determines the schedule of a leaders can slow down the flow of the project project on their own 11 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. It is pointed out in the passage that many of the cevaplayınız. ideas about work ----. Bertrand Russell’s essayInPraise of Idleness was first A) are claimed to be too old-fashioned to keep published in 1932, in the middle of the Great Depression, a period of global economic crisis. It might B) are those developed by workers and supervisors seem distasteful to promote the virtues of idleness at such a time, when unemployment was rising to a third of C) could easily be changed by thinking more deeply M the working population in some parts of the world. For Russell, however, the economic chaos of the time was D) are realistic based on previous work experiences itself the result of a set of deep-rooted and mistaken attitudes about work. Indeed, he claims that many of our E) might be mistaken due to country-specific conditions ideas about work are little more than superstitions, which should be swept away with rigorous thinking. Russell distinguishes between two kinds of workers: labourers and supervisors. To these, he adds a third group of non-workers – the leisured landowners who depend on other people’s labour to support their own 53. It is clearly stated in the passage thatInPraise of idleness. According to Russell, history is littered with Idleness was published during the Great Depression examples of people working hard all their livYes and ----. being allowed to keep just enough for themselves and their families to survive, while any surplus they produce A) to show that the economic chaos was a direct consequence of established work ethics is appropriated by warriors, priests and the leisured ruling classes. And it is always these beneficiaries of the B) when a third of the working population became system, says Russell, who are heard praising the virtues unemployed for no obvious reason of ‘honest toil’, giving a moral mask to a system that is manifestly unjust. And this fact alone should prompt us C) as Russell was seriously concerned with the results to re-evaluate the ethics of work. of high unemployment rates S D) in order to help economists devise economic policies E) so that the people who were unemployed could experience some relief 51. It can be inferred from the passage that Russell ----. A) finds hard work distasteful and unnecessary for the Öworking class 54. According to Russell, the concept of ‘honest toil’ ----. B) supports landowners’ idle way of life and strictly A) was originally put forward to produce economic argues everyone should be able to live the way they surplus for the benefit of the idle people do B) is still a valid expression describing the benefits of C) believes that people should definitely embrace regular work practices unemployment caused by the economic crisis C) should be re-assessed to get rid of the unfair practices of the privileged class D) sees the ethics of hard work as a mechanism used by the privileged class to ensure the continuation of D) helped the working class live decently and support the unjust system of labour their families E) argues that spiritual renewal brought about by E) was used to continue the oppression of priests over idleness is a basic human need the rich 12 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. It is stated in the passage that children with ADHD cevaplayınız. have a hard time ----. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is A) making carefully-thought decisions in situations diagnosed in 2 to 5 percent of children between the requiring much physical effort ages of 6 and 16; approximately 80 percent are boys. The typical ptoms of distractibility, hyperactivity and B) controlling themselves, their actions and their mood agitation occur at all ages, even in adults who have the M condition, but with considerable disparity. Children often seem forgetful or impatient, tend to disturb others and C) showing perfectly normal actions and behaviours in have a hard time observing limits. Poor impulse control familiar situations manifests itself in rash decision-making, irrational D) interacting with strangers in new situations as they actions and rapid mood swings. The child acts before feel lonely thinking. And yet, ADHD children often behave perfectly normally in new situations, particularly in those of short E) resisting the desire to watch TV or play games most duration that involve direct contact with individuals or of the time are pleasurable or exciting, like watching TV or playing games. Precursor behaviours such as a difficult temperament or sleep and appetite disorders have often been found in children younger than 3 who wYere later detected to have ADHD, but no definite diagnosis can be made in those first three years. Physical restlessness 57. According to the passage, ADHD can be diagnosed often diminishes in teenagers, but attention failure more accurately ----. continues and can often become associated with aggressive or anti-social behaviour and emotional A) providing that the ptoms are still traceable in problems, as well as a tendency towards drug abuse. adulthood B) after the child reaches the age of 3 S C) if physical restlessness observed in children becomes unbearable D) once precursor behaviours have begun to threaten 55. According to the statistics on ADHD, ----. other children A) adults with ADHD reflect typical ptoms in higher E) when parents notice aggressive actions percentages B) 80 percent of boys are diagnosed in the very early Ö years of childhood 58. It can be inferred from the passage that the C) typical ptoms in children are easier to be ptoms of ADHD ----. diagnosed than in adults A) vary in prominence and variety over the course of a D) boys are more prone to ADHD compared to girls lifetime B) might be quite different for girls or boys of different E) appetite disorders are more common than sleep ages disorders in people with ADHD C) are difficult to diagnose even through advanced treatment methods D) are more salient than others especially among teenagers who experience less parental intervention E) such as rash decision-making and rapid mood changes stem from genetic history 13 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. It is clear from the passage that if anger is to be cevaplayınız. used in a beneficial way, ----. In a crowded job market, success in getting a prime A) it should benefit a person who wants to be nice position is closely linked to making a great first rather than disagreeable impression. But you might be surprised to discover what that first impression should be. Dr. Victoria Brescoll of B) the appropriate expression becomes necessary Yale University showed test subjects one of two while talking to your co-workers M recorded job interviews in which the candidate talked about losing an important client at their previous job. C) it should be aimed only at people who also behave Half the subjects were shown a video where the in a similar manner candidate behaved angrily and blamed his co-workers. D) it needs to be used excessively so that it can act as The other subjects were shown a version where the a deterrent to others candidate expressed sadness at the lost client. Taking responsibility for your mistakes may sound E) for whom, when and how it will be used should be praiseworthy, but the angry candidate was rated as taken into account more competent than the sad one, and better able to cope with a position of high responsibility. “For anger to have positive effects, it needs to be used occasionally, targeted carefully and expressed appropriatYely.” Dr. Hajo Adam, of Northwestern University, says. Losing your temper is also perceived differently. Western 61. It is understood from the passage that ----. business culture regards anger as an expression of dominance whereas in Asia it is seen as a loss of A) those who regard themselves as nice are more liable control. In addition, according to a recent study, men to lose their temper who self-identify as being disagreeable earn 18 percent B) Asian cultures consider anger to be an important more than who think themselves as nice. factor that helps businesses improve C) Western business culture disapproves of anger if it S is used to express power D) the interpretation of anger in the workplace varies from culture to culture E) the reasons why people behave angrily are quite similar both in Western and Eastern cultures 59. According to the passage, Dr. Brescoll’s study puts forward that ----. Ö A) blaming someone else for a mistake that you have made is seen as being rude 62. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. B) career success is best accomplished when you take A) when it is controlled, anger might be the key to more responsibilities dealing with difficult situations C) analyzing job interviews provides both reliable and B) anger management studies are becoming unreliable findings on anger-control increasingly popular D) expressing your feelings is not a quality that is C) expressing sadness instead of anger for your generally admired mistakes is more acceptable in many cultures E) losing your temper can help you appear more skilful D) Brescoll’s and Adam’s findings appear to be at workplace contradictory E) there is a general agreement among scholars about why anger is considered negative 14 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Tarık: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  I believe global warming will define the political bulunuz. and cultural landscape of the 21st century. 63. Doruk:  A recent study shows that many young people Uğur: today just don’t have a clear vision for their future.  Critics say it has been invented to scare us into thinking we’re part of the problem when, in fact, Ender: wMe can’t really do anything.  ---- Tarık: Doruk:  ----  Yes, but besides planning, luck plays the greater part. Uğur:  No, not really. I guess I should be better informed, Ender: so I can have a more balanced opinion.  I disagree. For instance, I don’t owe my success to luck. A) I agree. Records of temperatures in some parts of the world cannot be regarded as representative on a global scale, can they? A) I think there’s too much emphasis placeYd on setting and achieving goals. Sometimes things happen B) I think the claims that global warming is nonsense spontaneously. are unfounded and can be disputed by scientific evidence. Haven’t you read anything about it? B) In that case, they’re probably not going to expect much from their future career. C) Well, the melting polar ice-caps is one of the indicators of global warming. Do you think there are other reasons for this? C) It’s their parents to blame for this fact. They should provide much greater support. D) It may be dangerous to dismiss the threat of global S warming. Don’t you think we should avoid using products that harm theenvironment? D) Do you think it’s only young people? What about the middle-aged, shouldn’t they also have a vision? E) International organizations are trying to find solutions to stop greenhouse gas emissions. Will all those efforts stop global warming? E) I can understand that. They just don’t seem to be able to set clear goals for themselves. Ö 15 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 65. Interviewer: 67. Lecturer:  What role does health psychology play in  Before I finish the lecture, let’s just go over the contributing to the goals of healthy people? main points again. Is there anywhere you would like to start? Health Psychologist:  It will raise their awareness of pain management, Student: fitness, substance abuse and eating disorders.  Well, we examined the importance of hospital gMardens, particularly in the treatment of young Interviewer: children.  ---- Lecturer: Health Psychologist:  ----  It will play an important role in both the management and prevention of chronic illnesses. Student:  You mentioned a 3-year-old who had a heart A) Isn’t health psychology an area young people are transplant and who loved to go out and feed the interested in? birds. He recovered really quickly. B) Nowadays, there are many attempts to fight against A) That’s right, and what makes them attractive? deadly diseases, aren’t there? Y C) What is the outlook for the future of health B) Yes, and what about hospitals that don’t have a psychology? garden? D) How do you treat those who have just started C) And what conclusions did we reach? working in your clinic? E) Does the training of health psychologists include D) Good. Now can you give me a specific example? public management? S E) OK, and do such gardens only contain plants? 66. Hakan:  Do you think we should accept everything modern science comes up with? Serap: Ö That’s quite difficult to answer. But I guess, not always. Hakan:  ---- Serap:  Remember; researchers are not always objectively motivated. A) I tend to think we don’t have any choice other than relying on researchers’ findings. B) So, you say the scientific process hardly allows flawed research to be published. C) However, the notion of trust has largely been ignored by lab scientists. D) I agree. The scientific establishment has matured enough to distinguish facts from fiction. E) You might have a point; I’ve heard of researchers plagiarizing. 16 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en 70. As well as being a great composer, Haydn yakın cümleyi bulunuz. supported and taught a number of important figures, including Mozart and Albrechtsberger. 68. A strong alliance should be formed between the tourism industry and the environment to enjoy a A) In addition to being a brilliant composer, Haydn healthy coexistence in the future. assisted and educated many prominent figures such as Mozart and Albrechtsberger. A) Whether a powerful alliance between the tourism M industry and the environment will succeed depends on their future. B) Haydn was not only a noteworthy composer but also a well-known teacher who was acquainted with B) In order to have a healthy future together, it is important names like Mozart and Albrechtsberger. necessary for the tourism industry and the environment to be closely connected. C) Supporting and teaching many important figures, C) The tourism industry and the environment may rely including Mozart and Albrechtsberger, led Haydn to heavily on each other for a healthy coexistence in become a successful composer. the future. D) It is possible only through a strong agreement YD) More than just being the teacher and supporter of between the tourism industry and the environment to many important names such as Mozart and lead a healthy coexistence over the coming years. Albrechtsberger, Haydn was also one of the most excellent composers of his time. E) Some strong link between the tourism industry and the environment is necessary for their enjoyable E) Haydn, who was a notable composer, taught and coexistence for a long time. helped such prominent figures as Mozart and Albrechtsberger, both of whom were quite famous composers of the time. S 69. Since most smartphones are all screen and not much else, they have a nasty tendency to shatter when dropped. 71. The activity of coffee trading on the international market is second only to petroleum. A) If you drop a smartphone which can be easily damaged, most of its screen may also shatter. A) Petroleum is one of the most internationally traded products, but coffee surpasses it. Ö B) Almost all smartphones are nothing more than a B) Increasing demand for petroleum makes coffee the screen, so they are quite likely to break into bits second most popular product in the world. once you drop them. C) Petroleum trading ranks the second worldwide when C) The screens of most smartphones will break into compared to coffee. many pieces if you drop them in a nasty way. D) Petroleum is the most internationally traded product, followed by coffee. D) Smartphones have such fragile screens that they can break into pieces when they are dropped. E) Coffee and petroleum are the two most valuable commodities in trade among countries. E) Most smartphones, with notable screen characteristics, are not easily broken unless you drop them several times. 17 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada 74. Identity in the 21stcentury is primarily anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek self-constructed. Within a world of diversity and cümleyi bulunuz. difference, style has become a crucial and 72. Each year 300,000 people in England and Wales get indispensible tool for its expression. ---- However, food poisoning from the Campylobacter bacterium. body style is undoubtedly our most powerful and ---- If the meat is not cooked properly, or if raw meat effective means of signalling where we are at. is allowed to cross-contaminate cooked food, you can end up swallowing live bacteria. The bacteria A)MThe human body is, by its very nature, special and are destroyed by stomach acid but some will always essential. survive. B) This is true of all aspects of style from home decorations to cars, kitchens to cuisine. A) Obviously, eating vegetables is known as a safer method of nutrition. C) What you look like is no longer strictly determined by your social situation and culture. B) It usually takes one or two days for the ptoms to D) Free from rules, appearance is now a matter of appear, so it can be difficult to identify what kind of personal creativity. food was eaten. E) Throughout history, humans have devised different C) The most common way to become infecYted is by methods to alter their appearance. eating contaminated chicken. D) Vegetarians have a much higher tolerance to this bacterium than non-vegetarians. 75. People generally have a repertoire of speech styles, and they automatically or deliberately tailor the way E) Common ptoms include fever, diarrhoea and they speak to the context of the communicative abdominal cramps. Sevent. For instance, we tend to speak slowly and use short words and simple grammatical constructions when we speak to foreigners and children. ---- A) Moreover, scientists claim that children acquire their 73. As some economic studies have shown, the longer first language listening to their parents and imitating a person is unemployed, the harder it becomes for them. him or her to find a job. Many companies are B) However, we use longer and complex sentences Öreluctant to hire those who have not worked for a when we are in a formal context such as an long time. There are 6,7 million Americans not interview. officially counted as part of the labour force, who say they would like to work. ---- C) In fact, there are other similarities and differences in word choice of men and women. A) A company should reform its working conditions if employees are not very productive. D) For example, most people can quite easily identify B) Integrating these people into the economy will be a Americans and Australians within various age long and expensive undertaking. groups. C) In Western Europe, where it is hard to fire people, E) In other words, speech style alone may not be employers are more cautious. sufficient to elicit a listener’s attitudes towards the group that the speaker represents. D) Not all unemployment is equal, as there are better and worse ways to be without a job. E) Likewise, there are not big differences between the unemployment rates of Europe and the US. 18 2013-YDS Sonbahar / İNGİLİZCE 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla 78. (I)In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase in okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan flying.(II)Cheap flights, bigger airports and the cümleyi bulunuz. convenience of Internet-ticketing have made flying a far 76. (I) We can often tell the country or region someone is more accessible form of transport.(III) However, this from simply by hearing them speak.(II) We do this, increased freedom has come with a huge environmental usually unconsciously, using cues such as accent and price.(IV)There are some modest technological vocabulary, which characterize regional dialects. improvements that have made aircraft cleaner, but this (III) We can also frequently discover clues about is nMot enough to compensate for the growth in flying that someone’s social identity, based on hearing them continues.(V) The maintenance of an aircraft requires speak.(IV)Such shared vocal characteristics also occur an experienced staff, but engineers play the most in animal species that are capable of vocal learning. important role. (V) People from different socioeconomic classes or age A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V groups may use different inflections or intonations even if they have the same regional dialect. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V Y 79. (I)One of the most widespread devices ever invented, the bicycle is everywhere.(II)Far cleaner than a car and quicker than walking, bicycles have become popular. (III) Bicycles in various forms were built by a host of 77. (I)An allergy is an abnormal response by the body to a inventors during the 19thcentury.(IV) They were specific stimulus or allergen.(II)These can be familiar, uncomfortable and difficult to ride, but a quick everyday substances such as house dust, pollen or succession of innovations towards the end of the animal fur, causing mild ptoms such as sneezing, century delivered bicycles that more closely resemble itchiness or a rash.S(III)Although allergies can be the machines we know and love today.(V) Bicycles are extremely unpleasant for the sufferer, they will rarely made of light material to enable the owner to carry necessitate first aid or emergency treatment.(IV)Hay easily in case they are broken down. fever, for instance, is an allergic response to pollens in the air, and is most commonly experienced during A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V summer months.(V)Similarly, many people may suffer unpleasant allergic reactions after ingesting particular foods. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V Ö 80. (I) While some restaurants serve a variety of dishes that are labelled as local, others present a menu including universal ones like hamburger or salad.(II)A meal at a fine restaurant will often seem to taste better than food eaten off a paper plate with plastic cutlery.(III) This is because our perception of the quality of food and drink does not only involve senses, but emotions and expectations play a role too.(IV) Colours can also affect how we perceive flavour.(V) In one famous French study, participants were convinced that they were drinking red wine when it was, in fact, white wine dyed red. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V TEST BİTTİ. 19 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. SINAVDA UYULACAK KURALLAR 1. Sınav salonları kamera ile kayıt altına alınacaktır. Kamera kayıtlarının incelenmesinden sonra sınav kuralla- rına uymadığı tespit edilen adayların sınavları Yönetim Kurulunca geçersiz sayılacaktır. 2. Cep telefonu ile sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Çağrı cihazı, telsiz, fotoğraf makinesi vb. araçlarla; cep bilgi- sayarı, kol ya da cep saati gibi her türlü bilgisayar özelliği bulunan cihazlarla; silah ve benzeri teçhizatla; müsved- de kâğıdı, defter, kitap, sözlük, sözlük işlevi olan elektronik aygıt, hesap cetveli, hesap makinesi, pergel, açıölçer, cetvel vb. araçlarla sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Bu araçlarla sınava girmiş adayların adı mutlaka Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak, bu adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacaktır. Sınava kalem, silgi, kalemtıraş, saat vb. araçla ve kulaklık, küpe, broş vb. takı, herhangi bir metal eşya ile gMirmek de kesinlikle yasaktır. Yiyecek, içecek vb. tüketim malzemeleri de sınava getirilemez. Adaylar sınava şeffaf şişe içerisinde su getirebilecektir. 3. Bu sınav için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır. Sınav başladıktan sonra ilk 110 ve son 15 dakika içinde adayın sınavdan çıkmasına kesinlikle izin verilmeyecektir. Bu süreler dışında, cevaplamayı sınav bitmeden ta- mamlarsanız cevap kâğıdınızı ve soru kitapçığınızı salon görevlilerine teslim ederek salonu terk edebilirsiniz. Bildirilen sürelere aykırı davranışlardan adayın kendisi sorumludur. 4. Sınav salonundan ayrılan aday, her ne sebeple olursa olsun, tekrar sınava alınmayacaktır. 5. Sınav süresince görevlilerle konuşmak, görevlilere soru sormak yasaktır. Aynı şekilde görevlilerin de adaylarla ya- kından ve alçak sesle konuşmaları ayrıca adayların birbirinden kalem, silgi vb. şeyleri istemeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. 6. Sınav sırasında, görevlilerin her türlü uyarısYına uymak zorundasınız. Sınavınızın geçerli sayılması, her şeyden önce, sınav kurallarına uymanıza bağlıdır. Kurallara aykırı davranışta bulunanların ve yapılacak uyarılara uymayanların kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. 7. Sınav sırasında kopya çeken, çekmeye kalkışan, kopya veren, kopya çekilmesine yardım edenlerin kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve bu adayların sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. Adayların test sorularına verdikleri cevapların dağılımları bilgi işlem yöntemleriyle incelenecek, bu incelemelerden elde edilen bulgular bireysel ya da toplu olarak kopya çekildiğini gösterirse kopya eylemine katılan adayın/adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacak ayrıca 2 yıl boyunca tarafından düzenlenen tüm sınavlara başvurusu yasaklanabilecektir. S Sınav görevlileri bir salondaki sınavın, kurallara uygun biçimde yapılmadığını, toplu kopya girişiminde bulunulduğu- nu raporlarında bildirdiği takdirde, bu salonda sınava giren tüm adayların sınavını geçersiz sayabilir. 8. Cevap kâğıdında doldurmanız gereken alanlar bulunmaktadır. Bu alanları doldurunuz. Cevap kâğıdınızı başkaları tarafından görülmeyecek şekilde tutmanız gerekmektedir. Cevap kâğıdına yazılacak her türlü yazıda ve yapılacak bütün işaretlemelerde kurşun kalem kullanılacaktır. Sınav süresi bittiğinde cevapların cevap kâğıdına işaretlenmiş olması gerekir. Soru kitapçığına işaretlenen cevaplar geçerli değildir. 9. Soru kitapçığınızı alır almaz kapağında bulunan ilgili alanları doldurunuz. Sayfaların eksik olup olmadığını, kitapçıkta Ö basım hatalarının bulunup bulunmadığını ve soru kitapçığının her sayfasında basılı bulunan soru kitapçık numarası- nın, kitapçığın ön kapağında basılı soru kitapçık numarasıyla aynı olup olmadığını kontrol ediniz. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfası eksik ya da basımı hatalıysa değiştirilmesi için salon başkanına başvurunuz. Size verilen soru kitapçığının numarasını cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru Kitapçık Numarası” alanına yazınız ve kodlayınız. Cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru kitapçık numaramı doğru kodladım.” kutucuğunu işaretleyiniz. Soru kitapçığı üzerinde yer alan Soru Kitapçık Numarasını doğru kodladığınızı beyan eden alanı imzalayınız. 10. Sınav sonunda soru kitapçıkları toplanacak ve ’de incelenecektir. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfalarını koparmayı- nız. Soru kitapçığının bir sayfası bile eksik çıkarsa sınavınız geçersiz sayılacaktır. 11. Cevap kâğıdına ve soru kitapçığına yazılması ve işaretlenmesi gereken bilgilerde bir eksiklik ve/veya yanlışlık ol- ması hâlinde sınavınızın değerlendirilmesi mümkün olamamaktadır, bu husustaki özen yükümlülüğü ve sorumluluk size aittir. 12. Soru kitapçığının sayfalarındaki boş yerleri müsvedde için kullanabilirsiniz. 13. Soruları ve/veya bu sorulara verdiğiniz cevapları ayrı bir kâğıda yazıp bu kâğıdı dışarı çıkarmanız kesinlikle yasaktır. 14. Sınav salonundan ayrılmadan önce, soru kitapçığınızı ve cevap kâğıdınızı salon görevlilerine eksiksiz olarak teslim etmeyi unutmayınız. Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve doğacak tüm mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ (1 EYLÜL 2013) İNGİLİZCE M 1. C 21. A 41. A 61. D 2. B 22. B 42. B 62. A 3. D 23. A 43. E 63. E 4. E 24. C 44. C 64. B Y 5. C 25. B 45. A 65. C 6. E 26. D 46. B 66. A 7. A 27. D 47. C 67. D S 8. D 28. C 48. B 68. B 9. E 29. E 49. B 69. B 10. B 30. E 50. D 70. A Ö11. C 31. B 51. D 71. D 12. E 32. B 52. C 72. C 13. A 33. E 53. A 73. B 14. D 34. E 54. C 74. B 15. D 35. D 55. D 75. B 16. A 36. A 56. B 76. D 17. E 37. D 57. B 77. C 18. B 38. E 58. A 78. E 19. C 39. D 59. E 79. E 20. B 40. C 60. E 80. A T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) (İlkbahar Dönemi) İNGİLİZCE 6 NİSAN 2014 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S AÇIKLAMA Ö 1. Bu soru kitapçığındaki test 80 sorudan oluşmaktadır. 5. Bu sınavın değerlendirilmesi doğru cevap sayısı üzerinden yapılacak, yanlış cevaplar dikkate alın- mayacaktır. 2. Bu test için verilen cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır (2,5 saat). 6. Cevaplamaya istediğiniz sorudan başlayabilirsiniz. Bir 3. Bu kitapçıktaki testte yer alan her sorunun sadece bir soru ile ilgili cevabınızı, cevap kâğıdında o soru için ay- doğru cevabı vardır. Bir soru için birden çok cevap yeri rılmış olan yere işaretlemeyi unutmayınız. işaretlenmişse o soru yanlış cevaplanmış sayılacaktır. 4. İşaretlediğiniz bir cevabı değiştirmek istediğinizde, sil- 7. Sınavda uyulacak diğer kurallar bu kitapçığın arka ka- me işlemini çok iyi yapmanız gerektiğini unutmayınız. pağında belirtilmiştir. İNGİLİZCE Bu testte 80 soru vardır. 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere 4. People seem to forget that an e-mail says so much uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. about them, but it can even ---- personality chaMracteristics. 1. Alzheimer’s disease is the major form of mental impairment in older people and is characterized by A)receive B)eliminate the ---- of brain tissue over an extended period of time. C)overcome D)convey A)clarification B)examination E) abandon C)deterioration D)realisation E) prevention Y 5. Children’s power to understand and reflect on their experiences ---- their ability to use verbal bols. A)depends on B)looks into 2. As video-gaming has become a ---- industry that attracts huge investment and intense competition, C)complies with D)brings about there are numerous ideas concerning its characteristics. E) sends out S A)massive B)constant C)challenging D)repetitive E) complementary 6. Famous Brazilian photographer Sebastião Salgado ---- photography after a brief career as an economist in the 1970s. Ö A)gave off B)took up 3. When compared with petrol, hydrogen is ---- clean C)called for D)pulled over and does not produce carbon emissions when it is burned. E) handed in A)severely B)fundamentally C)promptly D)gradually E) relatively 1 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere 10. Diseases and injuries that result from alcohol uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. consumption are usually attributed ---- lower socio-economic status, and this seems to be true 7. You ---- good about helping others when you see ---- individuals, countries and regions. how it ---- a difference for someone else. A)to / for B)at / with A) feel / will have made C)Minto / across D)by / in B) are feeling / had made E) upon / along C) will feel / has made D) felt / is making E) had felt / will make 11. ---- all the roles of the state ---- the modern world, none should be underestimated or ignored. YA)At / by B)To / across 8. In September 2003, the National Book Foundation ---- that Stephen King ---- the recipient of a ‘lifetime C)Of / in D)From / upon award’. E) Within / for A) would be announcing / is to be B) announces / has to be C) had announced / used to be S D) had been announcing / has been 12. ---- the role of calcium has received an enormous amount of attention, very few people realise that E) announced / would be without its partner, magnesium, calcium does not serve the body nearly as well as it should. A)If B)Whereas C)Whenever D)Since 9. ---- by the Romans first and then by Arabs, Crete ---- Ö by the Ottomans in the 17thcentury. E) Once A) Taking over / had been conquered B) Having been taken over / had conquered C) Having taken over / conquered 13. Whether in the countryside or in city, a hotel should D) Taken over / was conquered not be built ---- there is a proven need for it. E) To be taken over / was being conquered A)in case B)unless C)though D)because E) after 2 14. For centuries, people have thought that we have two brains ---- we have two lungs or two kidneys. A)until B)even though C)whether D)so long as E) just as M 15. As with other chronic illnesses, asthma affects ---- patients ---- their families. A) not only / but also B) the more / the more Y C) neither / nor D) such / that E) less / than S 16. ---- children and older people, who suffer most of their unintentional injuries at home, young and middle-aged adults are often injured in the workplace. A)In contrast to B)Instead of C)Due to D)Thanks to Ö E) In case of 3 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya 19. ifadeyi bulunuz. Most scholars agree that Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is overdiagnosed today. To them, such A)should have given B)could have given overdiagnosis leads to relying too heavily on pills (17)---- skills, such as teaching children better ways of coping C)used to give D)may give with stress. The American Psychiatric Association’s M diagnostic manual of the past 20 years outlines three E) ought to give sets of (18)---- for ADHD: inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity – the child (19)---- answers too quickly. For accurate diagnosis, a child must display at least six of the nine listed ptoms for at least half a year across these categories. (20)----, at least some problems must be present before the age of seven and produce 20. impairment (21)---- at least two different settings such as school or home. A)In addition B)Therefore Y C)Nonetheless D)Otherwise E) Still 17. S21. A)by means of B)owing to A)on B)in C)rather than D)with regard to C)at D)to E) in terms of E) from Ö 18. A)assessments B)prescriptions C)adoptions D)treatments E) indicators 4 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya 24. ifadeyi bulunuz. Most people sum up Florida in just one word: vacation. That is not a new (22)----. A century ago, steamboats and A)together with B)in terms of then railroads brought northerners to the land of sunshine. (23)---- there is one individual’s name that C)owing to D)despite often appears on road names as well as the front or M back covers of history books, it is that of Henry Flagler. E) as opposed to His determination (24)---- his vision transformed Florida from a wilderness into a 20th-century state in a matter of years. (25)---- constructing a railroad down the eastern coast of the state, he provided thousands with easy access to areas where many people had previously 25. struggled (26)---- in isolated communities. A)About B)From Y C)Behind D)At E) By 22. A)achievement SB)invention 26. C)application D)experiment A)to have lived B)to live E) association C)living D)having lived E) lived Ö 23. A)Although B)Whereas C)If D)Whether E) Unless 5 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde 30. Since they have a tendency to have chronic tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. illnesses, ----. 27. If you own a property in Turkey but do not want to A) health care professionals build interdisciplinary live in it all year round, ----. teams to develop innovative strategies A) you can always rent it as a holiday home B) some people can benefit from increases in healthy life expectancy M B) you should remember that the Turkish holiday C) wealthy people have a longer life span compared to season is very short poor people C) some people hope to make a quick return on their D) the majority of people in the West make group rather investment than individual physician appointments D) you should try and get used to the local culture E) older people use health care service more heavily than younger people E) it is possible that it will lose its value dramatically Y 31. As contradictory health advice appears in tabloid newspapers on an almost daily basis, ----. 28. When a radically new form of the flu virus evolves, A) people argue whether sunlight is beneficial or ----. harmful to human health A) the experts have decided which three strains of the B) sunlight does not just affect your state of mind but virus are likely to be most prevalent next year your body S B) we have been using vaccines to protect against C) the ultraviolet B radiation in sunlight encourages seasonal flu for over 60 years your body to make vitamin D C) it can rapidly spread across the globe, claiming lives D) children in sunny Australia have been found to be along the way more prone to egg allergy D) around the world, labs are working towards such a E) it is too much sunshine that poses the problem when universal flu vaccine skin cancer is concerned E) a universal flu vaccine fails to provide any protection Ö against catching a cold 32. Some species become extinct every year due to hunting, ----. 29. Even if you learn only a few Turkish words as a A) as animals like foxes and racoons have adapted to tourist, ----. increased urbanization and now live in parks A) Turkey is as safe to visit as anywhere else in Europe B) yet, in some parts of the world, animals such as zebras and rhinos are protected in wildlife reserves B) you should check opening times before setting out C) so pollution of oceans kills animals and plants and on any sightseeing expedition poisons their habitats C) Turks will respect any attempt at their difficult D) though cultivating more and more land has led to the language loss of habitats like rainforests D) many English language publications are available in E) and ecology explains how individual species fit into major cities in Turkey the natural world E) public telephones will prompt you to select the language of your choice 6 33. ----, coffee is surely known to stimulate the nervous 36. ----, many of the main tourist attractions in London system, acting on both mental and physical are fairly close to one another. functioning. A) Although the city is much more spread out than A) Because it is recommended for some digestive other European capitals problems B) Now that hotel prices tend to stay high all year round B) If the properties of caffeine need to be more M scientifically evaluated C) As the city is facing an increasing migration problem C) Given that excessive coffee consumption leads to insomnia and anxiety D) Given that the routes for many places will take you D) While its effects on sleep may vary from one to the past individual to another E) Despite the fact that it is an excellent city for walkers E) As many women suffering from bladder pain agree with its parks that caffeine drinks irritate a sensitive bladder Y 34. A growing body of research shows that being bad can actually be good, ----. A) but the trick is knowing exactly when and where to show your dark side B) whereas lying and cheating are regarded by some people as positiSve traits that can make us stronger C) because groups that behave nicely do better than groups that fight D) though you may think your greatest threat is still your fellow men E) as a result, we have developed polite behaviour, morality and law Ö 35. Anger and sadness are an important part of life, ----. A) so you may not want to express how you feel to another person B) as positive thoughts and emotions can boost self-esteem C) while unpleasant feelings are as crucial as enjoyable ones D) although many people find it helpful to breathe slowly while learning to tolerate strong feelings E) and new research shows that experiencing such emotions are vital to our mental health 7 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye 39. It is difficult to find the most suitable dose of drugs anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye to be used to treat illnesses, and virtually all drugs anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. will produce undesirable side effects if too high a 37. How advertisements affect both the audience and dose is given. those who rely on advertising for their income is one of the most important debates on the media. A) Hastalıkları tedavi etmede kullanılacak ilaçların en uygun dozunu bulmak zordur ve aşırı yüksek doz A) Medyayla ilgili en önemli tartışmalardan biri de Mverilirse neredeyse bütün ilaçlar istenmeyen yan reklamların hem izleyiciyi hem de reklamlardan etkiler doğuracaktır. kazanç sağlayanları nasıl etkilediği olmuştur. B) Hastalıkları tedavi ederken kullanılacak ilaçların en B) Medyayla ilgili en önemli tartışmalardan biri uygun dozunu bulmak zordur çünkü aşırı yüksek reklamların hem izleyiciyi hem de gelirleri için dozda verildiğinde neredeyse bütün ilaçlar reklamlara bel bağlayanları nasıl etkilediğidir. istenmeyen yan etkilere sebep olmaktadır. C) Reklamların hem izleyiciyi hem de gelirleri için C) Hastalıkları tedavi ederken kullanılacak ilaçların en reklamlara bel bağlayanları nasıl etkilediği medyayla uygun dozunu bulmak zordur çünkü aşırı yüksek doz ilgili en önemli tartışmalardan biridir. verilirse neredeyse bütün ilaçlar istenmeyen yan etkiler ortaya çıkarmaktadır. D) Reklamların hem izleyiciyi hem de reklamlardan gelir Y elde edenleri nasıl etkilediği medya hakkındaki en D) Hastalıkları tedavi etmede kullanılacak ilaçların en önemli tartışmalardan birini oluşturmaktadır. uygun dozunu bulmak zordur ve aşırı yüksek doz kullanımında istenmeyen yan etkilerin ortaya E) Reklamlardan gelir elde edenlerin ve izleyicilerin çıkması kaçınılmazdır. reklamlardan nasıl etkilendikleri medyayla ilgili en önemli tartışmalardan birinin konusudur. E) İstenmeyen yan etkiler neredeyse bütün ilaçlar aşırı yüksek dozda kullanıldığında ortaya çıkar, bu yüzden hastalıkları tedavi etmede kullanılacak ilaçların en uygun dozunu bulmak zordur. S 38. Advanced data analysis is now on the verge of breaking free of its confines in hospitals and computer labs and making its way into our daily lives. 40. Zaman Virginia Woolf’un eserlerinde sadece kaybetmenin bir sembolü olarak ortaya çıkmaz, aynı A) Gelişmiş veri analizi artık sınırlarından kurtulup zamanda farklı şekillerde de kendisini gösterir. hastanelerde ve bilgisayar laboratuvarlarında olduğu gibi günlük hayatımıza girmek üzere. Ö A) Time in Virginia Woolf’s works mostly appears as a bol of loss, but it reveals itself in various forms as well. B) Hastanelerdeki ve bilgisayar laboratuvarlarındaki sınırlarından kurtuluyor olması, gelişmiş veri B) Time appears in Virginia Woolf’s works as a bol analizinin artık günlük hayatımıza gireceğini of loss, as well as in various other forms. göstermekte. C) Gelişmiş veri analizi artık hastanelerdeki ve C) In Virginia Woolf’s works, time is not only a bol bilgisayar laboratuvarlarındaki sınırlarından kurtulup of loss but also of various other things. günlük hayatımıza girmek üzere. D) In Virginia Woolf’s works, time appears as various D) Hastanelerdeki ve bilgisayar laboratuvarlarındaki forms, not only as a bol of loss. sınırlarından kurtulan gelişmiş veri analizi artık günlük hayatımıza girmek üzere. E) In Virginia Woolf’s works, time not only appears as a bol of loss, but it also reveals itself in various E) Günlük hayatımıza girmek üzere olan gelişmiş veri forms. analizi artık hastanelerdeki ve bilgisayar laboratuvarlarındaki sınırlarından kurtuluyor. 8 41. Her ne kadar hiç kimse kadınların neden doğum sonrası depresyonuna girdiklerini kesin olarak bilmese de birkaç açıklama makul görünmektedir. A) The reasons for postnatal depression of some women are totally unknown, but there are some plausible explanations. M B) Even though very little is known why women experience postnatal depression, some explanations seem plausible. C) Nobody knows the reasons for postnatal depression experienced by women, but there are some explanations that seem plausible. D) Although no one knows for sure why women suffer from postnatal depression, a few explanations seem plausible. Y E) In spite of some plausible explanations, nobody knows for sure why some women experience postnatal depression. 42. Toplumda bilime yönelik artan hayal kırıklığının temel sebebi, bilimS insanlarının birbirleriyle sürekli tartıştıkları algısıdır. A) There has been considerable disappointment with science in the public, as people think that scientists are always arguing with each other. B) The main reason for growing disappointment with science in the public is the perception that scientists are always arguing with one another. Ö C) The fact that scientists are always arguing with one another causes profound disappointment with science in the public. D) The perception that scientists are always arguing with each other can be a good reason for growing disappointment with science in the public. E) Increasing disappointment with science in the public has been mainly resulting from the thought that scientists are always arguing with one another. 9 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. It is pointed out in the passage that radio waves ----. cevaplayınız. A) are transferred to a transmitter in the body For fifty years, scientists have been trying to create tiny gadgets that travel around a patient’s bloodstream, detecting and even fixing diseases. But how to power B) have long been used to transfer power to move them has been a problem. Formerly-used batteries have gadgets in veins shrunk over the years but have not been miniaturized M sufficiently to fit into a medical device small enough to C) have been found to be capable of penetrating the travel through veins and arteries. So instead of using tissues them, engineers at Stanford University have developed D) are created by expanding the implants’ mechanical tiny implants that can be powered by radio waves component beamed from a transmitter outside the body. The idea of using electromagnetic waves to transfer power to E) have been proven to be effective without the implantable medical devices is not new, and in principle, assistance of a secondary unit it sounds simple. A transmitter outside the body emits radio waves travelling through the tissues. They are then picked up by an antenna on the internal device where they induce a voltage. The trouble is, scientists 45. It is stated in the passage that ----. previously thought that radio waves would sYtruggle to A) implantable gadgets have been on trial for some get through human tissue. But a researcher at Stanford patients before actual experiments can be University found strong evidence that they do pass conducted through. He used a chunk of beef as a stand-in for human flesh and found that sufficient energy moved B) the size of the implants used within the body through it to make electromagnetic power transfer affected the level of the transmission feasible. Already, working prototypes that can propel themselves have been developed, but the distance through which power can be transferred inside the body C) shrinking the batteries has helped scientists to insert still needs improvement. the device more comfortably into the arteries S D) the self-moving devices recently developed need additional power-transfer improvement E) using batteries instead of implants provides more 43. It is clear from the passage that inserting a gadget productive results into a patient’s bloodstream ----. Ö A) has depended on the size of the radio transmitters 46. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. B) has challenged scientists for half a century A) removing the medical device from the body has been the scientists’ main concern C) will be widely used in many hospitals in Stanford B) inserting medical devices into the body may have harmful effects on people D) showed promising results in people with narrow arteries C) prototypes should first be tested on people for a period of time E) has led to quite a dramatic reduction in the size of batteries D) diagnosis and treatment of some diseases may be easier in the long run E) attempts to discover new methods of powering the implants will probably fail 10 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. One can clearly understand from the passage that cevaplayınız. ----. The realization that we must protect nature from the A) politicians often seem to provide support for effects of human activity is not a modern innovation. advanced protection efforts at all costs However, a definite environmental consciousness has arisen in Western industrialized nations only since the B) Western countries were not involved in 1960s. In recent decades, coastlines contaminated by environmental protection before the 1960s M spilled oil, declining fish populations, the destructions of the ozone layer, increasing desertification and dying C) environmental protection is a matter of forests have all pointed to the tolerance limits of institutionalized concern rather than individual ecological systems. The supporters of most D) in order for the environmental protection projects to environmental protection efforts include individuals, civic be successful, they should ignore financial interests alliances and political associations such as environmental and nature groups, as well as E) individuals and institutions involved in environmental governments, businesses and the scientific community. protection come from all walks of life All of them face the challenge of maintaining the balance of nature. However, since the environment as a whole cannot be fully protected or restored to its original 49. According to the passage, ----. condition, environmental protection efforts aYlways require compromises between economic, political and A) damages given to the environment should be social interests. Not every measure made possible by stopped completely so that the environment can technology is truly feasible, given the various costs and repair itself trade-offs involved. Many proposals that are strongly advocated in scientific circles cannot be implemented B) technological solutions to environmental damage are due to economic concerns or a lack of political will. often cost-effective, but other conditions might make Similarly, many initiatives set in motion by governments them difficult to put into practice meet with only hesitant acceptance in society. C) an environmental precaution that can technologically S be put into practice receives support from most sections of the society D) governments usually have hard time proceeding with their proposals since most citizens find them overtly political 47. It is clearly stated in the passage that ----. E) the public might have some suspicion about A) organized attempts to protect the environment are a environmental protection projects although Örelatively recent issue governments regard them applicable B) humankind was not involved in environmental protection in the distant past 50. One can infer from the passage that ----. C) contamination is the most dangerous man-made threat to the environment A) scientific protection projects often fail because scientists take into account financial interests D) environmental damage started in Western countries in the last century B) it is the clash of interests that results in extensive environmental damage in most parts of the world E) ecological systems in the nature have recently been spoilt irreversibly C) it is highly challenging to take action to protect the nature due to various intervening conditions D) the nature can be protected even if governments, scientists and the public do not reach a compromise E) organized attempts to protect the environment have proved fruitful despite the challenges involved 11 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. One can infer from the passage that Africa ----. cevaplayınız. A) needs to explore employment opportunties for the Africa has the fastest growing and most youthful youth for economic growth population in the world. Over 40% are under the age of 15 and 20% are between the ages of 15 and 24, which can be said to be the definition of youth all over the B) is experiencing demographic problems resulting world. These statistics present a serious challenge. Can from lack of governmental support all over the M Africa seize the opportunities being presented, or do continent Africa’s youth constitute a ticking, demographic time-bomb? Despite sub-Saharan Africa recording an C) is more likely to be the most populated continent in average annual economic growth rate of 6%, this the near future remarkable and rapid growth has often been non-inclusive, and it has become increasingly clear that insufficient attention has been paid to the creation of D) has a very high percentage of young people, which employment opportunities for young people. The current prevents employment for everybody demographic trend only worsens the problem as the pressure to create new jobs will increase markedly over E) will have great difficulty in shaping its economy the coming decades, if what is known as the unless young people have a key role in such areas ‘demographic dividend’ is not realized. One Ydefinition of as education and technology the demographic dividend is a large workforce that creates a window of opportunity to invest in the education and health of their children, increase economic outputs and invest more in technology and 53. According to the passage, the economic growth ----. skills to strengthen the economy. It is a stage that the most successful developing economies experience. A) cannot be permanent even if new job opportunities Indeed, as much as one third of East Asia’s economic are provided for young population miracle was closely associated with demographic change. B) in African countries is not very rapid when compared Sto that of East Asian countries C) is a result of the current demographic trend that integrates workpower into the economy D) of sub-Saharan African countries helps them to invest in the education and health of children E) in African countries is significant but not perfect in 51. It is clearly stated in the passage that ----. terms of employment of young population ÖA) the definition of youth in Africa is controversial when statistical data are considered 54. What is the main idea of the passage? B) African countries are expected to have the most A) Young population constitutes an opportunity for as developed economies in the world, as they have a well as a threat to the economic development of high percentage of young people African countries. C) African countries have a lot in common with East B) Having young population can mean achieving Asian countries in terms of economic success economic prosperity in the future as seen in Africa. D) changes in population were an important factor in C) The realization of demographic dividend accounts the economic success of countries in East Asia for the rapid economic growth in African countries. E) young people, in particular, have the power and D) Although what East Asian countries did so as to ability to make an economy successful in East Asian boost their economies affected African politicians, countries they have not made any attempts to do the same. E) African countries should follow the example of East Asia, as they have similar demographic profile. 12 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. According to the passage, ----. cevaplayınız. A) nationalism constituted the central point of Gandhi’s Arguably the most influential figure in the history of political campaigns Indian politics, Gandhi became the bol of Indian nationalism and was given the status of the Father of B) Gandhi was not always interested in controlling the the Nation after India achieved independence in 1947. actions of politicians Gandhi’s most significant contribution to Indian politics was perhaps his belief in the strength of ordinary C)MGandhi’s political understanding introduced politics into the daily lives of people people. Gandhi was able to mobilize the Indian people primarily because the demands his politics made upon D) the ultimate contribution of Gandhi to politics was his the individual were not extraordinary. His insistence on alternative to Western democracy non-violence which characterized his campaigns of civil disobedience allowed people to participate in national E) Gandhi limited the power of the Indian people by politics in many different ways, none of which getting them to become non-violent necessarily required a break with people’s daily lives. Gandhi was able to create a national mood, which cut across castes, classes, religions and regional loyalties 57. The author of the passage states that ----. by rejecting the boundaries that these created as irrelevant to the moral truth that he made ceYntral to his A) Gandhi managed to bring together all parts of the discourse. This at times led him to limit the more radical Indian society irrespective of their social background aspects of nationalist aspirations of some within his Congress Party. Another distinguishing feature of B) Gandhi was in favour of following the developed Gandhi’s philosophy was his opposition to Western world to achieve national development modernization as a model for India’s development. C) Indian people failed to appreciate the contributions of Gandhi to Indian political life D) Gandhi was able to abolish the caste system in India Sby creating a national unity E) the bases of Gandhi’s political views were in line with existing systems 55. It is clear from the passage that ----. A) Gandhi had already received a national title even before India's independence 58. One can understand from the passage that ----. A) Gandhi owes his political influence mainly to his B) Gandhi believed that ordinary people are strong extraordinary aspirations Ö enough to make great political changes in the society B) Indian people were fascinated by the developments in the West C) the political views of Gandhi demanded a high level of political involvement of ordinary people C) Gandhi taught important lessons to other political figures of his time D) whatever Gandhi proposed was accepted without D) Gandhi’s political views strengthened the Indian being questioned people’s belief in independence E) relying on the participation of ordinary people in politics can lead to productive results E) the political discourse of Gandhi incorporated elements from Indian caste structure 13 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. According to the passage, the research carried out cevaplayınız. on mice ----. French manicures and finding the end of the sticky tape; A) provided scientists with a deep insight into the if this is all you thought fingernails were good for, think regenerative ability of stem cells again. A new study explains why our nails are crucial to our natural ability to grow back lost finger, and even B) confirmed the absolute location of stem cells on a provides clues as to how we might enhance our limited mouse’s body M powers of regeneration. Although we might not be able to grow whole fingers, we can regrow the ends of C) was not successful as it was expected since it did amputated fingers. For years, scientists have wondered not initiate any chain reactions why this only happens when some of the nail is left D) ended up being insignificant as it succeeded in behind. But now the answer has been discovered. growing ends of fingers instead of whole fingers Studying mice, the biologists found stem cells – cells that can change into any other kind – in a layer just E) failed to produce results that make scientists believe below the nail on mice toes. When the very tip of a toe that it is practical with humans as well is amputated, a chain reaction is initiated that draws nerves to the area. This in turn prompts the stem cells to form new bone tendons and muscle. If a finger is 61. The attitude displayed by the leader of the team amputated too far back and there is no nail,Y this chain studying mice is ----. reaction does not get started. It is thought that the same mechanism is behind the regeneration of human A)hopeful B)sceptical fingertips. “If we could identify all the molecules that have this special ability to induce this kind of C)criticizing D)pessimistic regeneration, a pharmacological approach to treat amputees might become available,” says the researcher who led the study. E) unrealistic S 62. What could be the best title for the passage? A) Working with Stem Cells of Mice 59. It can be understood from the passage that human B) How to Grow Fingers nails ----. C) Innovations in Biology and Medicine A) are not of very much use in terms of regenerating fingers unless a substantial amount of them does D) Stem Cells are Answer to Many Diseases Ö not remain on the finger E) Fingernails Point the Way to Regeneration B) might be key to growing or regenerating full fingers in the near future C) will not be used for growing back the tips of lost fingers for another decade D) have some valuable health functions other than simply looking aesthetic or helping us with some simple tasks E) have recently been known as a potential means of producing new organs in the human body 14 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Fahri: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  The use of chemicals poses serious hazards to bulunuz. the environment. It’s often the main cause of 63. Job Applicant: habitat destruction.  I’ve applied for this position mainly because I like interacting with people. Aydın:  ---- Interviewer: M  ---- Fahri:  Could you give me an example to support your Job Applicant: claim?  I don’t have much experience about financial problems. I’d like to learn about them while I’m Aydın: doing it.  Sure. Following World War II, chemicals were used to control agricultural pests, which Interviewer: increased productivity and farmers' income.  Alright. Thanks for showing up. We’ll contact you soon about the result of your application. A) Significant fish kills have resulted from the legal Yapplication of chemicals, such as the 1991 death of A) That’s interesting. You’ve come to the right place if more than one million fish in the US. you’re interested in dealing with various people. B) Yes, I agree, but people have long been using a variety of chemicals in a wide range of areas for B) I’m trying to understand what traits you have to some benefits. distinguish you from other candidates. C) While some ecological changes due to heavy use of chemicals have been documented, others remain C) Looking over your CV, I assume that you can poorly researched and understood. contribute a lot to our company by using your high S skills in financial problem solving. D) More and more chemicals have been pressed into use in industry, but pollution arising from industrial D) We’re looking for a candidate with plenty of sources can now be effectively prevented. experience in public relations. E) When chemicals like insecticides reduce the insect populations that comprise the diet of birds, this leads E) Our company has many skilful and intellectual to dramatic population reductions. employees. Are you ready to work with them? Ö 15 65. Dilek: 66. Hakan:  I'm rather disturbed by the sound of incoming  Do you think new technologies can have mails and messages on your mobile phone. I can additional benefits for us? hardly concentrate on what I'm doing. Gizem: Salih:  ----  Sorry, but I need to see the messages from customers instantly to answer. HaMkan:  Does this mean we can react more quickly to what Dilek: we read and improve our attention?  ---- Gizem: Salih:  Exactly. If we develop a better ability to scan large  Yes, that may be a good way, but I think I'm a bit amounts of information rapidly, we can obsessed with responding to messages right distinguish between what’s important and what away. But I can try it anyway. isn’t. A) I think you're a hard-working employee, so you can A) Some activities, such as sending e-mail or playing respond to the messages coming from customers at video games, are said to sharpen some cognitive Y any time you like. abilities. B) Customers might perhaps reach you during the day B) We should take advantage of their efficiencies, but through the company’s telephone line to talk about we also need to maintain our skills unique to your projects. humankind. C) It must be really stressful for you to deal with all C) Disadvantages can actually outweigh advantages, those incoming messages all day, so I can help you so we have to cope with negative aspects all the with your work if you like. time. S D) Visiting your customers in person could also be an D) It's proven that many people who have been working option for you to build up your profits. on the Internet for several hours without a break report making frequent errors. E) That’s right, but why don’t you disable the message E) Well, in my opinion, our brains are not built to sound and try answering them at regular intervals by sustain monitoring for extended periods, and mental checking your inbox? stress is threatening to become an epidemic. Ö 16 67. Nancy: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en  In your article, you explain the relationships yakın cümleyi bulunuz. between culture and our perception of advice. Am I right? 68. There is some evidence that the way we handle stress and the way we are affected by it change with Dr. Watson: age.  Yes, you are. This is actually the main point I make in my paper. A)MAs we age, evidence can be found related to the way we deal with and manage our stress levels. Nancy:  ---- B) Evidence regarding age-related stress shows that our ability to deal with stress and its effects change Dr. Watson: over time.  Though we don’t know much about the prevalence, we do know very well that it exists C) How we handle stress and how we deal with it everywhere and in every culture. change according to the evidence related to age. A) Do you think your paper will receive interest from the scientific world? D) As we get older, evidence suggests that how stress Y affects us and how we deal with it change. B) How do people from different cultures perceive autism then? E) There is evidence to suggest that our ability to C) Can you come up with any satisfactory solution to manage stress and its effects worsens as we get this problem? older. D) You also say autism is universal. What do you mean by that? E) Will you continuSe to search for a relationship between culture and autism? Ö 17 69. It may be tempting to seek relief in sleep after a 70. If we were to go into recession, the government traumatic event, but a recent study found that would no longer be allowed to spend its way out. sleeping after trauma might lead to increased post-traumatic stress disorder. A) The government would have to cut down on public expenditure in case of a recession. A) Although it may seem comforting to use sleep as a B) If we went into recession, the government would not means of dealing with a traumatic event, a recent be allowed to increase taxes. study has shown that doing this could actually result M in more post-traumatic stress disorder ptoms. C) In case of a recession, government spending would no longer be a permissible way out. D) The government would now be allowed to spend its way out if a recession occurred. B) Seeking relief through sleep after a traumatic event seems to be the natural thing to do; however, a E) The government should be allowed to spend more recent study has found that the ptoms of just in case a recession occurs. post-traumatic stress disorder might not be best handled in this way. Y C) Traumatic events are often relieved by sleeping 71. Bird migration is similar to an extreme endurance immediately after such experiences, and according sport, but even the most impressive human athletic to a recent study, this might be the best way of dealing with post-traumatic stress disorder efforts lose significance in comparison to it. ptoms. A) No matter how excellent a human athlete can be in his attempts in an extreme endurance sport, it cannot be likened in any way to bird migration. D) A recently published study has shown the connection betwSeen increased post-traumatic stress disorder ptoms and the body’s natural ability to B) Even though migrating birds can be likened to seek relief after experiencing a traumatic event. human athletes in extreme endurance sports, the best athletes prove to be far superior to birds. C) Both bird migration and human athletic activities are E) Finding comfort through sleep after a traumatic similar in that the best examples in both cases are event is what most people tend to do, and this is the very impressive. main focus of a recent study that looked into the Öincrease of post-traumatic stress disorder ptoms. D) An extreme endurance sport endeavour is comparable to bird migration; however, its most extraordinary instances go beyond it in comparison. E) Bird migration is akin to an extreme endurance sport; nevertheless, no matter how remarkable they are, human sports activities fall behind when compared to it. 18 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada 74. Many jargon terms pass into the standard language. anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek Jargon spreads from a narrow group until it is used cümleyi bulunuz. by a large segment of the population, similar to 72. Many psychologists reject Freud’s view that dreams slang. ---- This is true of the now ordinary French typically represent unconscious wishes and word meaning ‘head’ tête, which was once a slang particular objects, and events in a dream are word derived from the Latin testa, which meant bolic. Instead, they believe that the direct, overt ‘earthen pot’. action of a dream is the local point of its meaning. M For example, a dream in which we have not studied A) Two words can have the identical linguistic meaning, for an exam does not relate to unconscious, and one can be acceptable for use, and the other unacceptable wishes. ---- Even more complex might be strictly forbidden. dreams can often be interpreted in terms of B) Every conceivable science, profession, trade and everyday concerns and stress. occupation has its own set of words, some of which are considered to be ‘slang’ and others ‘technical’. A) Instead, it simply may mean that we are concerned about a hard test that we will take soon. C) Shakespeare used the expression ‘beat it’ to mean ‘scram’, and ‘beat it’ would be considered by most B) Dreams can reflect events occurring in a dreamer’s English speakers to still be a slang expression. environment. Y C) It was important to pierce the armour of a dream’s D) Eventually, it may lose its special status as either clear content to understand its true meaning. jargon or slang and gain entrance into the respectable circle of formal usage. D) Moreover, it can be tested in an experiment whether this is true or not. E) The use of slang varies from region to region, as one would expect, so slang in New York and Los E) Although dreams are the rehearsal of a real event, Angeles is not the same. they are not actually related with real actions. S 75. Caring for the young may delay ageing in the brain. 73. ---- Many of these expectations have been Gro Amdam, who studies ageing in bees at Arizona demonstrated by social anthropologists. Margaret State University, observed improvements in Mead, for example, showed that in some societies, cognition among older bees that turn their attention women are expected to be subordinate, gentle and back to nursing. ---- Amdam’s theory is that when submissive, while in others, they are expected to be older individuals participate in tasks typically Öaggressive and competitive. handled by a younger generation – whether in a hive or in our own society – antioxidant levels increase in A) Gender refers to differences in the way that men and the brain, which slows the ageing process. women in a particular society are expected to feel. A) This change in social behaviour could help the human brain as well. B) We have long known that there are big differences between societies in the way women are expected to B) In a bee colony, there is a perfect distribution of behave. duties, leaving no room for any delay in ageing. C) Women today have a number of expectations from C) However, changing social roles can have negative the study of female relations. impact on both the young and the old. D) It is essential that we try and keep our brain young at D) People may debate how different men and women any cost. are in their expectations. E) The study is subject to serious criticism, as bees and humans are very different species. E) The relationships of power and inequality between men and women have changed over the centuries as expected. 19 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla 79. (I) State firms, whether big or small, have undergone okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan several changes since they were established. (II) Not cümleyi bulunuz. until a very long time ago, they were nothing more than 76. (I) Bowling is an indoor sport with an ancient history. parts of the government machine. (III) Also, there was a (II) It is played by delivering a ball at pins as opposed to widespread doubt about whether they could succeed. a target. (III) If you learn to bowl, you will enjoy a popular (IV) They can be a huge financial burden on the state if sport. (IV) The game of nine pins was taken to the US by not managed carefully for sustainable development. Dutch and German immigrants. (V) When the sport was (V)M Today, however, they include some of the world’s outlawed, a 10thpin was added as a way around the biggest companies, playing a key role in global trade. legislation. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V Y80. (I) Though social psychology might sometimes be 77. (I) Cloning is a technique for creating genetically misunderstood, it still preserves its popularity among identical copies of an animal. (II) It works by taking prospective university students. (II) Whether we want to genetic material from an adult animal and inserting it understand ourselves or the social world around us, into the nucleus of an egg cell taken from a female social psychology offers valuable insights. (III) Social animal. (III) The cell is then treated with electricity to psychologists study our sense of personal identity, our stimulate it to grow and then implanted into the female impressions of other people and our beliefs about world and brought to full term. (IV) For this reason, it is unlikely events. (IV) Social psychology also helps us understand that the production of human clones by this technique the stories behind today’s news headlines such as the will be approved for S many years. (V) In 1996, it was used impact of the Internet on social life, changing roles for to produce Dolly the sheep, the world’s first ever cloned women and men, or eyewitness identification in criminal mammal. trials. (V) Today, social psychology is more useful than ever before since a society becomes more diverse and A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V multicultural. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V Ö 78. (I) San Francisco was founded by the Spanish in 1776, but only a handful of historic buildings survived the catastrophic fire of 1906. (II) It broke out following the most violent earthquake in the history of Northern California. (III) Thus, the city’s oldest building is the Mission Dolores, which was built in the late 18th century. (IV) This is also the name of one of the city’s most bohemian neighbourhoods. (V) Every neighbourhood in San Francisco has its own distinctive features. A) I B) II C) III D) IV E) V TEST BİTTİ. 20 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. SINAVDA UYULACAK KURALLAR 1. Sınav salonları kamera ile kayıt altına alınacaktır. Kamera kayıtlarının incelenmesinden sonra sınav kuralla- rına uymadığı tespit edilen adayların sınavları Yönetim Kurulunca geçersiz sayılacaktır. 2. Cep telefonu ile sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Çağrı cihazı, telsiz, fotoğraf makinesi vb. araçlarla; cep bilgi- sayarı, kol ya da cep saati gibi her türlü bilgisayar özelliği bulunan cihazlarla; silah ve benzeri teçhizatla; müsved- de kâğıdı, defter, kitap, sözlük, sözlük işlevi olan elektronik aygıt, hesap cetveli, hesap makinesi, pergel, açıölçer, cetvel vb. araçlarla sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Bu araçlarla sınava girmiş adayların adı mutlaka Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak, bu adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacaktır. Sınava kalem, silgi, kalemtıraş, saat vb. araçla M ve kulaklık, küpe, broş vb. takı, herhangi bir metal eşya ile girmek de kesinlikle yasaktır. Yiyecek, içecek vb. tüketim malzemeleri de sınava getirilemez. Adaylar sınava şeffaf şişe içerisinde su getirebilecektir. 3. Bu sınav için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır. Sınav başladıktan sonra ilk 110 ve son 15 dakika içinde adayın sınavdan çıkmasına kesinlikle izin verilmeyecektir. Bu süreler dışında, cevaplamayı sınav bitmeden ta- mamlarsanız cevap kâğıdınızı ve soru kitapçığınızı salon görevlilerine teslim ederek salonu terk edebilirsiniz. Bildirilen sürelere aykırı davranışlardan adayın kendisi sorumludur. 4. Sınav salonundan ayrılan aday, her ne sebeple olursa olsun, tekrar sınava alınmayacaktır. 5. Sınav süresince görevlilerle konuşmak, görevlilere soru sormak yasaktır. Aynı şekilde görevlilerin de adaylarla ya- kından ve alçak sesle konuşmaları ayrıca adayların birbirinden kalem, silgi vb. şeyleri istemeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. Y 6. Sınav sırasında, görevlilerin her türlü uyarısına uymak zorundasınız. Sınavınızın geçerli sayılması, her şeyden önce, sınav kurallarına uymanıza bağlıdır. Kurallara aykırı davranışta bulunanların ve yapılacak uyarılara uymayanların kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. 7. Sınav sırasında kopya çeken, çekmeye kalkışan, kopya veren, kopya çekilmesine yardım edenlerin kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve bu adayların sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. Adayların test sorularına verdikleri cevapların dağılımları bilgi işlem yöntemleriyle incelenecek, bu incelemelerden elde edilen bulgular bireysel ya da toplu olarak kopya çekildiğini gösterirse kopya eylemine katılan adayın/adayların sınavı S geçersiz sayılacak ayrıca 2 yıl boyunca tarafından düzenlenen tüm sınavlara başvurusu yasaklanabilecektir. Sınav görevlileri bir salondaki sınavın, kurallara uygun biçimde yapılmadığını, toplu kopya girişiminde bulunulduğu- nu raporlarında bildirdiği takdirde, bu salonda sınava giren tüm adayların sınavını geçersiz sayabilir. 8. Cevap kâğıdında doldurmanız gereken alanlar bulunmaktadır. Bu alanları doldurunuz. Cevap kâğıdınızı başkaları tarafından görülmeyecek şekilde tutmanız gerekmektedir. Cevap kâğıdına yazılacak her türlü yazıda ve yapılacak bütün işaretlemelerde kurşun kalem kullanılacaktır. Sınav süresi bittiğinde cevapların cevap kâğıdına işaretlenmiş olması gerekir. Soru kitapçığına işaretlenen cevaplar geçerli değildir. Ö 9. Soru kitapçığınızı alır almaz kapağında bulunan ilgili alanları doldurunuz. Size söylendiği zaman, sayfaların eksik olup olmadığını, kitapçıkta basım hatalarının bulunup bulunmadığını ve soru kitapçığının her sayfasında basılı bulu- nan soru kitapçık numarasının, kitapçığın ön kapağında basılı soru kitapçık numarasıyla aynı olup olmadığını kontrol ediniz. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfası eksik ya da basımı hatalıysa değiştirilmesi için salon başkanına başvurunuz. Size verilen soru kitapçığının numarasını cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru Kitapçık Numarası” alanına yazınız ve kodlayınız. Cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru kitapçık numaramı doğru kodladım.” kutucuğunu işaretleyiniz. Soru kitapçığı üzerinde yer alan Soru Kitapçık Numarasını doğru kodladığınızı beyan eden alanı imzalayınız. 10. Sınav sonunda soru kitapçıkları toplanacak ve ’de incelenecektir. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfalarını koparmayı- nız. Soru kitapçığının bir sayfası bile eksik çıkarsa sınavınız geçersiz sayılacaktır. 11. Cevap kâğıdına ve soru kitapçığına yazılması ve işaretlenmesi gereken bilgilerde bir eksiklik ve/veya yanlışlık ol- ması hâlinde sınavınızın değerlendirilmesi mümkün olamamaktadır, bu husustaki özen yükümlülüğü ve sorumluluk size aittir. 12. Soru kitapçığının sayfalarındaki boş yerleri müsvedde için kullanabilirsiniz. 13. Soruları ve/veya bu sorulara verdiğiniz cevapları ayrı bir kâğıda yazıp bu kâğıdı dışarı çıkarmanız kesinlikle yasaktır. 14. Sınav salonundan ayrılmadan önce, soru kitapçığınızı, cevap kâğıdınızı ve sınava giriş belgenizi salon görevli- lerine eksiksiz olarak teslim etmeyi unutmayınız. Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve doğacak tüm mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ (6 NİSAN 2014) İNGİLİZCE M 1. C 21. B 41. D 61. A 2. A 22. E 42. B 62. E 3. E 23. C 43. B 63. C 4. D 24. A 44. C 64. B Y 5. A 25. E 45. D 65. E 6. B 26. B 46. D 66. A 7. C 27. A 47. A 67. D S 8. E 28. C 48. E 68. D 9. D 29. C 49. E 69. A 10. A 30. E 50. C 70. C Ö11. C 31. A 51. D 71. E 12. B 32. B 52. A 72. A 13. B 33. D 53. E 73. B 14. E 34. A 54. A 74. D 15. A 35. E 55. B 75. A 16. A 36. A 56. C 76. C 17. C 37. C 57. A 77. D 18. E 38. C 58. E 78. E 19. D 39. A 59. D 79. D 20. A 40. E 60. A 80. A T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) (Sonbahar Dönemi) İNGİLİZCE 7 EYLÜL 2014 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S AÇIKLAMA Ö 1. Bu soru kitapçığındaki test 80 sorudan oluşmaktadır. 5. Bu sınavın değerlendirilmesi doğru cevap sayısı üzerinden yapılacak, yanlış cevaplar dikkate alın- mayacaktır. 2. Bu test için verilen cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır (2,5 saat). 6. Cevaplamaya istediğiniz sorudan başlayabilirsiniz. Bir 3. Bu kitapçıktaki testte yer alan her sorunun sadece bir soru ile ilgili cevabınızı, cevap kâğıdında o soru için ay- doğru cevabı vardır. Bir soru için birden çok cevap yeri rılmış olan yere işaretlemeyi unutmayınız. işaretlenmişse o soru yanlış cevaplanmış sayılacaktır. 4. İşaretlediğiniz bir cevabı değiştirmek istediğinizde, sil- 7. Sınavda uyulacak diğer kurallar bu kitapçığın arka ka- me işlemini çok iyi yapmanız gerektiğini unutmayınız. pağında belirtilmiştir. İNGİLİZCE Bu testte 80 soru vardır. 4. Exposure to sunshine enables the production of 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. vitamin D in our skin, and this ---- the growth and M maintenance of healthy bones and teeth. 1. The story of creating power begins with the ---- of A) deteriorates B)declares the most obvious natural resources around us – water and wind. C)promotes D)articulates A) termination B)estimation E) differentiates C)perception D)exploitation E) elaboration Y 5. How a person ---- stress is more important than the number of stressors in that person’s life. A) copes with B)relies on 2. Since a modern company cannot survive without information and computer technologies, they have C)leads to D)puts aside become an ---- part of any commercial venture or worldwide businesSs system. E) pertains to A) unavailable B)infrequent C)intact D)unbearable E) inseparable 6. A stroke occurs when the blood supply of an area of brain cells is ---- for a long period of time, resulting Ö in the death of the cells from lack of oxygen and nutrients. A) set up B)cut off 3. Without knowing distances ----, it can be difficult to plan a journey, so maps are very beneficial tools for C)put down D)left out people to find their way easily. A) accurately B)suspiciously E) taken over C)innovatively D)rapidly E) controversially 1 10. The study of visual illusions is critical ---- 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. understanding the basic mechanisms of sensory perception and advancing cures ---- neurological diseases. 7. The famous artist Raphael’s final works ---- so good that museums like the Prado and the Louvre ---- a A) off / toward B)at / with whole exhibition to them. M A) were / have dedicated C)in / about D)to / for E) on / from B) should have been / dedicate C)are / had dedicated 11. ---- the chaos that arose after the political and D)would be / are dedicating economic changes in the Union of Soviet Socialist YRepublics, the newly formed republics were anxious to make deals ---- foreign investors. E) have been / will have dedicated A) During / with B)After / upon C)Through / off D)Before / into E) Until / from 8. If the soldiers ---- aSt the beginning of the siege of Rhodes Island, they ---- to Crete or somewhere else with their treasures. A) surrender / must have been transported 12. By the age of three, a child’s brain is almost fully B) would surrender / could be transported grown ---- her bones and muscles are still underdeveloped. C)had surrendered / might have been transported A) since B)but Ö D)used to surrender / could have transported C)if D)unless E) could surrender / should have been transported E) once 9. A new type of airport X-ray scanner ---- lately by an innovative company ---- the contents of bottles. 13. ---- the world has been changing more rapidly than ever before, managers and other employees A) has been built / to detect throughout an organization must perform at higher and higher levels. B) was built / to have detected A) Because B)In case C)will be built / being detected C)As if D)Although D)had been built / having detected E) Unless E) is built / to be detected 2 14. ---- evidence of the civilization of the ancient Egypt was apparent everywhere, little was known of its detailed history until its hieroglyphic writing was deciphered in the early 19th century. A) Since B)Just as M C)Although D)Given that E) Only if 15. One central question in acupuncture is ---- the needles reduce pain ---- patients are simply responding to suggestions. Y A) whether / or B)neither / nor C)either / or D)so / that E) as / as S 16. Being very significant ---- economical and geopolitical aspects, control of the Bosphorus was always demanded by many countries. A) in spite of B)rather than Ö C)instead of D)regardless of E) in terms of 3 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 19. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. To look inside an ant nest is to think about an alien A) must be B)used to be civilization. The busy mass of worker ants (17)---- an upturned stone is both strangely similar to human C)should have been D)will have been society and strikingly different. (18)---- us, ants build structures, find food, defend their societies and manage M E) might be waste. They (19)---- well-organized to do all these. For example, leaf-cutting ants have special waste disposal areas for storing hazardous waste and a team of ‘waste-disposal ants’ dedicated to keeping the nest clean. But ants (20)---- this familiar end result in a very different way to humans. Human societies have 20. centralized control. In other words, someone tells us what to do. Ants, (21)----, have decentralized control, and neither the queen nor any other ant directs work. They A) defeat B)regret are the ultimate self-starters, following specific, but flexible, rules in certain situations. YC)achieve D)select E) host 17. 21. S A) beneath B)off A) in contrast B)in addition C)towards D)against C)accordingly D)for instance E) through E) in short Ö 18. A) Despite B)Instead of C)Due to D)Like E) Thanks to 4 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 24. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. There is an important difference between good teaching A) except for B)in spite of and effective teaching. Good teaching refers to a process of instruction (22)---- effective teaching refers to C)owing to D)as well as the outcomes of instruction. Among other things, a good teacher is one who provides a review at the start of a M new lesson, states reasonable objectives, (23)---- an E) instead of appropriate level of lesson difficulty, engages students in the learning process (24)---- emphasizing important points during instruction. Good teaching focuses on the processes and procedures that a teacher uses while preparing for and delivering instruction. But effective teaching goes one step (25)---- the process of teaching. 25. It focuses on whether students actually learn from instruction. An effective teacher is, therefore, one whose students learn what they (26)----. A) under B)against Y C)beyond D)without E) off 22. A) while SB)provided that 26. C)even if D)because E) until A) should have been taught B) had been taught Ö C)was taught 23. D)might have been taught E) have been taught A) disputes B)conquers C)renews D)maintains E) claims 5 29. As long as there are sufficiently large volumes of 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. information ----. A) it is easy to get a machine to learn to do complicated 27. Although the Internet can present threats ----. things B) the complexity arises from the vast numbers of A) psychological research suggests that most people Mconnections within the system use the Internet in ways to enhance their social relationships and personal well-being C)human-like machines have begun to influence every realm of life B) growing numbers of people are reluctant to rely on e-mail both for business and keeping in touch with friends and relatives D)people would need to change their ideas about what artificial intelligence means C)critics worry that the Internet typically offers more E) people have expressed their concerns about privacy than superficial contact with strangers in an age of computerised systems Y D)the fact that young people often know more about computers than their parents do can add to concerns 30. As the age of children rises, needing less care ----. E) computer use can account for the low academic achievement of students A) mothers pay more attention to the quality of pre-school education S B) mothers who have more than two children tend to have some psychological problems 28. Even if DNA may have influence on our moral C)part-time work has developed because of women’s character ----. preference to work more A) it is widely believed that we are products of our D)mothers can gradually shift from part-time to full-time social and cultural environment Ö work B) such moral understandings are often regulated by religious and legal taboos of various kinds E) the low level of care provided by governments becomes an important factor C)thinking of ethics often begins with assumptions about human nature D)people debate whether being moral is simply a matter of obeying social norms E) the story of ethics is to some extent a description of attempts to legalize morality 6 31. In spite of the current Japanese dominance of the 33. All parents struggle to find the right balance region ----. between encouragement and discipline ----. A) the importance of regional economic blocs is likely A) when it comes to raising their kids to continue to increase in Tokyo B) although they already know the causes B) the China-based economy of Asia is rapidly M emerging as a new centre for industry and commerce C)since they have accomplished this important duty C)Japan is one of the world’s most unstable geological zones, and Japan experiences more than 1,000 D)because neighbours always complain about their earthquakes per year children D)culture and religion can also form different types of E) as children need to be loved by their parents national sub-groups Y E) Japan has had an enviable record for growth and prosperity 34. ---- your body will be supplied with higher levels of energy and become more resistant to diseases. A) Just as a number of supplements can be used to make up for calcium deficiency S 32. Spending money on others can provide happiness ----. B) Even if you change your eating habits and avoid living a stressful life A) even when you use your own hard-earned cash C)Although you have routine blood-pressure or cholesterol level checks B) once people in poor countries have tried to meet their own basic needs D)Once you get used to consuming vitamin-rich Ö vegetables like broccoli and cabbage C)although the tendency to experience joy from helping is part of human nature E) Unless you strengthen your muscles and bones through regular exercise D)after children can get pleasure from helping others E) whereas charities make it easy for donors to see how their contributions are used 7 35. Parasites live on or inside other living beings ----. 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. A) and there are more than 1,000 types that can live 37. Textbooks are viewed as a means of presenting inside humans established bodies of knowledge to students. B) so some animals prefer to spend most of their time alone A)MDers kitapları, yerleşmiş olan bilgiyi öğrencilere takdim eden araçlar olarak görülür. C)although animals are the only living things with B) Yerleşmiş olan bilgi, öğrencilere ders kitapları muscles and nerves for movement and sensation aracılığıyla aktarılmaktadır. D)because defensive animals have avoidance methods such as speed and colour C)Ders kitaplarının yerleşmiş olan bilgiyi öğrencilere aktarma işlevi bulunmaktadır. E) but the heat of cold-blooded animals comes from D)Yerleşmiş olan bilgiyi öğrencilere sunan ders outside the body kitapları bir araç olarak görülmektedir. Y E) Öğrenciler, yerleşmiş olan bilgiyi ders kitapları aracılığıyla edinir. 36. We often forget the value of things surrounding us ----. A) for some aspects of life inspire pride in our cultural heritage 38. Many people still use plants as medicine, and about S half of medicines bought from a drugstore are B) even if people avoid paying attention to old crafts obtained directly from plants. and skills that were once crucial A) Birçok insan bitkileri hâlâ ilaç olarak kullanmakta ve doğrudan bitkilerden elde edilen ilaçlar eczaneden C)and only when seen through the eyes of tourists do alınan ilaçların yaklaşık yarısını oluşturmaktadır. we revalue our culture B) Birçok insan bitkileri hâlâ ilaç olarak kullanmakta ve D)since some rituals and ceremonies have been so eczaneden alınan ilaçların yaklaşık yarısı doğrudan Öcommon in some civilizations bitkilerden elde edilmektedir. E) so we learn to appreciate more fully the importance C)Bitkiler hâlâ birçok insan tarafından ilaç olarak of culture kullanılmakta ve doğrudan bitkilerden elde edilen ilaçların yaklaşık yarısı eczanelerden alınmaktadır. D)Eczanelerden alınan ilaçların yaklaşık yarısı doğrudan bitkilerden elde edilmekte ve birçok insan bitkileri hâlâ ilaç olarak kullanmaktadır. E) Doğrudan bitkilerden elde edilen ilaçların yaklaşık yarısını birçok insan hâlâ eczanelerden almakta ve kullanmaktadır. 8 39. How much vision is affected by a cataract depends 41. 2010'da yapılan bir araştırma, on yıl düzenli olarak on the intensity of light entering the eye and the cep telefonu kullanmış olan kişilerin belirli location of the cataract. tümörlerin gelişiminde daha büyük bir riskle karşı karşıya olduklarını ortaya çıkarmıştır. A) Katarakt, bulunduğu yere ve göze giren ışığın ne kadar yoğun olduğuna bağlı olarak görüşü etkiler. A) A study carried out in 2010 revealed that people who have used mobile phones regularly for 10 years face Ma higher risk of developing certain tumours. B) Katarakt nedeniyle görüş, göze giren ışığın yoğunluğuna ve kataraktın yerine bağlı olarak B) A study that was carried out in 2010 suggests that etkilenir. people who have used mobile phones constantly for 10 years are in greater danger of developing certain tumours. C)Göze giren ışığın yoğunluğu ve kataraktın bulunduğu yer, kataraktlı gözde görüşün ne kadar C)In 2010, a study was carried out revealing the fact etkilendiğini belirler. that people who face a higher risk of developing certain tumours are the ones who have used mobile phones regularly for 10 years. D)Görüşün katarakt nedeniyle etkilenip etkilenmediği, göze giren ışığın yoğunluğuna ve kataraktın D)People who have used mobile phones for 10 years Y bulunduğu yere göre değişir. face a higher risk of developing certain tumours, and this was revealed by a study carried out in 2010. E) Görüşün katarakt tarafından ne kadar etkilendiği, göze giren ışığın yoğunluğuna ve kataraktın yerine E) In 2010, it was found in a study that people who bağlıdır. used mobile phones periodically for 10 years faced a higher risk of developing certain tumours. S 40. Hem zaman alıcı hem de sağlıksız olduğu için bazı sebzeleri pişirirken mümkün olduğunca kaçınılması 42. 20. yüzyılda Birleşik Devletler’de meydana gelen gereken şeylerden biri, onları haşlamaktır. ortalama yaşam süresindeki 30 yıllık artış, iyileştirilen tıbbi bakım sayesindeydi. A) Since boiling some vegetables is both A) Improved medical care contributed to a 30-year time-consuming and unhealthy, you should avoid increase in life expectancy that occurred in the boiling them as much as possible. United States during the 20th century. Ö B) As it is both time-consuming and unhealthy, one of B) The 30-year increase in life expectancy that the things that should be avoided as much as occurred in the United States during the 20th century possible while cooking some vegetables is boiling was due to improved medical care. them. C)The only way of cooking some vegetables to be C)The 20th century saw a 30-year increase in life avoided as much as possible is boiling them, expectancy in the United States owing to improved because boiling is both time-consuming and medical care. unhealthy. D)Both time-consuming and unhealthy, boiling must be D)Thanks to improved medical care, a 30-year avoided as much as possible while cooking some increase in life expectancy occurred in the United vegetables. States in the 20th century. E) Although boiling some vegetables is both E) In the 20th century, there occurred a 30-year time-consuming and unhealthy, it cannot be avoided increase in life expectancy in the United States in some situations. because of improved medical care. 9 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. It is clear from the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A) there are 4 million undereducated villagers in A garment factory complex in Savar, Bangladesh, Rana Bangladesh, still waiting to be employed Plaza, collapsed on 24 April 2013. The collapse of Rana Plaza, a structurally deficient eight-story building, was a B) China produces better quality garments than local disaster with global implications. Bangladesh is the Bangladesh world’s second biggest manufacturer of ready-made M garments (RMG) after China. The industry is C)the RMG industry had to be halted in Bangladesh responsible for nearly 80% of the country’s exports, after the collapse earning $19 billion annually, or about 13% of its GDP (Gross Domestic Product). Some 4 million Bangladeshis – mostly undereducated villagers – work in the country’s D)ready-made garments comprise the largest share of RMG trade, making T-shirts and jeans for top Bangladesh's exports international brands. Pictures of the collapse put an intimate face on what is, in Bangladesh, a crucial but E) workers in Bangladesh can earn more by working poorly regulated and often dangerous industry. In early extra hours in RMG industry June 2013, six weeks after Rana Plaza fell, a photographer and a reporter teamed up to trace the Y backstories of the Rana Plaza survivors and victims to try to learn how they lived and died. What they found out was that Bangladesh’s RMG workers follow a common developing-world pattern: leave the familiarity of the 45. According to the passage, ----. village for the harsh uncertainty of the city in the hope that higher urban wages translate into a better life for A) the working conditions of the deceased have been their families and for later generations. What sets investigated by the authorities Bangladeshi garment workers apart is that they lose their lives on the job with depressing frequency. B) many international brands ceased business with S Bangladesh after the disaster C)pictures of the disaster revealed the truth hidden from developed countries D)people were let back into the disaster area six weeks 43. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. later Ö A) the collapse of the Rana Plaza should have attracted E) there are very few governmental controls in the RMG more attention worldwide industry B) there were far more workers in the Rana Plaza than the building could handle C)the Rana Plaza was not properly constructed 46. The author points out that the RMG-workers in Bangladesh differ from other developing-country workers in that ----. D)the Bangladeshi government has always prioritized the conditions of workers in the RMG industry A) they are brave enough to leave their villages E) the workers in the Rana Plaza did not have a B) the mortality rates among them are higher reputation for producing high-quality garments C)they dedicate their work to later generations D)they are not intimidated by uncertainties in the city E) they need to work much harder and longer hours 10 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. It is understood from the passage that an increase cevaplayınız. in openness is ----. A) the outcome of stronger relationships Research reveals that a changing character can influence life satisfaction even more than economic disturbance. A study investigated how evolving B) a consequence of personal contentment character traits relate to life satisfaction. Researchers assessed 8,625 people aged 15 to 93 at two points, four C)Mexpected to result in more happiness in life years apart. They measured the Big Five personality traits (openness to experience, agreeableness, D)enhanced by greater job satisfaction conscientiousness, extroversion and neuroticism) and tracked fluctuations in external aspects of subjects’ E) considered as the most important personality trait lives, including marital status, income and employment status. The data reveal that the participants’ character changed during those four years at least as much as demographic factors, such as marital status or employment. And those small personality shifts were more closely tied to life satisfaction than the other 49. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. indicators were. For instance, people who grew less Y agreeable reported less fulfilled in life than they had felt A) personality change occurs mainly in combat four years earlier, whereas those who became more soldiers, and they become more agreeable open reported greater contentment. This study did not individuals attempt to find out what caused the subjects’ personalities to transform, but other recent work has shown that certain experiences can change specific B) psychological trauma is the main reason why we traits. For instance, psychological trauma – such as that experience shifts in personality traits experienced by combat soldiers – has been linked with decreases in agreeableness and conscientiousness. SC)what we experience as well as changes in personality traits have an effect on life satisfaction D)demographic factors, such as marital status or employment do not change as much as personality 47. The study mentioned in the passage reveals that ----. traits among older adults E) self-reports from people aged 15 to 93 suggest that ÖA) a person’s personality remains stable from early adult personality is static after a certain age adulthood to old age B) certain shifts in personality over time can contribute to life satisfaction C)among the Big Five personality traits, openness and extroversion start to decline in old age 50. What could be the best title for the passage? A) How We Grow over Time D)greater job satisfaction decreases neuroticism and increases extroversion B) How to Change our Personality Traits E) some personality traits are more prone to change C)Economic Concerns versus Life Satisfaction than others D)Life Satisfaction Linked to Personality Changes E) Forces of Personality Change 11 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. It is clear from the passage that what made Roman cevaplayınız. baths an indispensable part of the life ----. A) had a lot to do with the fact that Romans failed to Both beginners and specialists in ancient studies often find any leisure activities other than siesta ask why bathing was so important to Roman society. This question might be an easy one, but there are no easy and definite answers. Bathing was a significant B) is a combination of reasons related to economic, part of their lives, an institution rooted in the structure of Mphysical and psychological well-being their day. The Roman day normally reserved the afternoon for leisure. Already, by the end of the C)focussed specifically on health benefits of the activity Republic, spending the latter part of the afternoon, after itself a light lunch and siesta, in the public baths had become a tradition, a comforting part of urban life and national D)still applies to the popularity they bear to this day identity. But why did bathing become a daily habit in the first place? The first and most important is the pleasure factor. At its most basic, bathing is physically and psychologically satisfying. Warm, moist air and water E) could be explained by the fact that it was relax the body and clear the mind. Another factor that cost-effective helps account for the popularity of baths is the Y well-entrenched belief in the ancient world that baths were good for health. Bathing was considered a serious therapeutic measure and received full support from ancient medicine. Finally there is also a basic economic explanation. Baths were built in such large numbers 53. The author of the passage gives specific reasons in because running a public bath was seen a sensible an attempt to explain ----. lucrative business proposition. A) how it was possible for Roman baths to survive up to today S B) what methods were used by ancient Roman businessmen to run baths 51. According to the passage, Roman baths ----. C)why bathing became a popular trend in ancient Rome A) had to wait till the end of the Republican era to gain D)when Roman baths became a ‘must-have’ part of its deserved popularity Ö the society B) are found interesting by both novices and experts in E) in what terms Roman baths could be deemed good ancient studies for health C)were the place for Romans to go on occasions when they did not prefer siesta for their leisure D)in both town and country had the same design as well as abundance 54. What could be the best title for the passage? E) became a significant part of the daily life, resulting in A) Development of Roman Baths the formation of an institution to run public baths B) Bathing Rituals and Activities in Ancient Rome C)Popularity of Roman Bathing Culture D)Architecture of Roman Baths E) Differences between Urban and Country Baths in Ancient Rome 12 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. One can infer from the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A) when compared with experiential purchases, Nicole Mantie and her husband Dean bought a house, material purchases cost a lot more with a bathroom in a terrible state. The bathroom needed an urgent fixing. But after hearing their friend’s B) people are more likely to enjoy spending money on stories of a magical five-star safari, they decided to go experiences than purchasing material goods for it instead of fixing the bathroom. Although going on a M safari sounds less sensible than investing in a better C)the author is opposed to the idea that experiencing bathroom, a decade of scientific research reveals the unusual events can make us feel happier than surprising wisdom of their decision. Studies show that buying things people get more happiness from buying experiences than buying material things. Why? Experiences are D)material purchases have long lasting effects while more likely to bring us together with other people while experiential purchases do not material things are enjoyed alone. In one study, researchers from the University of Colorado discovered E) people should be better prepared when they make that pairs of strangers enjoyed talking more when they material purchases discussed experiential (versus material) purchases. Nicole and her husband recount getting kissed by a Y giraffe while on safari. No matter what your opinion about a giraffe’s kiss is, you must admit that this experience makes for a more surprising story than having a new bathroom. 57. Getting a kiss from a giraffe ----. A) bolizes an unusual experience to be shared with friends B) was what made Nicole and Dean love safaris S 55. The couple mentioned in the passage ----. C)costs more than renovating one's old bathroom A) had to spend a lot more money than they had originally intended when they went on a safari D)is less of a topic to talk with strangers than mend the bathroom B) had already been seeking out memorable activities before they bought a house Ö E) is encouraged by the staff of University of Colorado C)were satisfied with the decision they made when its consequences are taken into account D)would have been more pleased if they had renovated their bathroom instead of going on a safari 58. What could be the best title for this passage? E) were invited to take part in more safaris after their pleasant experiences A) The Superiority of Experiences over Material Goods B) When to Make Profitable Purchases C)The Studies on Couples’ Spending Choices D)How Choices Influence Marriage E) The Effects of Material Goods on Our Lives 13 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. According to the passage, ----. cevaplayınız. A) the polygraph cannot prove precisely if someone is The polygraph, or the lie detector as it is often referred guilty or not to, measures autonomic nervous system activity by B) drug addicts tend to perform better on the test sensors attached to different parts of the body. The sensors measure changes in breathing, cardiac activity C)detecting emotional changes is easier than and sweating. The indicators only show physiological Mphysiological ones changes, usually induced by emotion. The machine D)the polygraph detects not only lies but also physical amplifies signals picked up from sensors placed at changes in the body specific parts of the body. It detects not lies, but physical E) the polygraph is the latest development in lie changes that are the results of specific emotions. detection, which has been quite popular People are asked ‘hot’ or relevant questions as well as ‘cool’ or control questions. The assumption is that for innocent people there is no physical difference in the way they respond to relevant and control questions. The other assumption is that suspect can be identified if he 61. One can conclude from the passage that ----. or she exhibits physical changes in his or her body. Therefore, suspects who are to be tested by polygraph use certain drugs to suppress autonomic ne Y rvous A) the polygraph is able to keep records for a long time system activity and make any physiological recording inconclusive. More worryingly, people can be trained to B) the parts of the body to which sensors will be defeat the test with a range of techniques. Tests would attached should be determined faultlessly therefore not only be highly unreliable but C)there has been a dramatic increase in the number of counterproductive: alienating and misclassifying the drugs used to fake the polygraph innocent and letting the guilty get away without receiving D)so many people have been trained to detect lies the punishment he or she deserves. E) if the polygraph is to be used, it requires far more S improvement 59. It is pointed out in the passage that the polygraph 62. It can be understood from the passage that the ----. author ----. A) tries to explain why the use of polygraph is open to ÖA) is a reliable device used in various fields doubt B) criticizes courts using the polygraph as a proof B) can detect effectively when someone is notably telling lies C)favours the use of the polygraph even though it C)measures physical changes in the body triggered by causes ambiguity emotion D)informs the reader that the polygraph, on its own, is D)is better at detecting guilty people than those who able to both record and detect accurately are innocent E) aims to encourage people to use the polygraph for E) has a very complicated application, which makes it specific purposes hard to detect people who react very quickly 14 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Ceyhun: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  I haven’t been feeling very well for a long time. bulunuz. I’ve tried hard but cannot help feeling less and less happy. 63. Martin:  I read Tom Jenkinson has built his entire career Kemal: out of doing the unexpected.  It sounds like depression. Maybe you need some Mchanges in your life. Experts believe that living in Jack: the country may be relaxing for your mind.  ---- Ceyhun: Martin:  ----  No, not necessarily. I think he doesn’t want to repeat himself or imitate his predecessors. Kemal:  I quite agree with you. I hope you’ll be alright Jack: soon.  It must be really interesting and challenging for him. A) Interesting, that makes sense. Perhaps I should now focus more on my retirement and settling down in a A) I’m sure teenage girls are passionate fanYs of him. village. B) Do you really think I’m going to suffer from B) That sounds disappointing. Why bother to please depression? I wonder whether you know any others? psychologists I can see. C)It is just the atmosphere of the scenes that makes C)So that means living in the countryside will refresh him so amazing. me, as it may provide wonderful views. Yet, I can’t Sdecide what to do. D)Does it mean that his all life is based on surprising the others? D)I’m not ready to give up my urban living. I suspect those experts haven’t made an evidence-based E) Then, he must be really proud of himself. comparison of urban living and country living. E) It must be due to plenty of stress factors in cities. I’ve heard of many studies confirming the link between social strain and mental illness. Ö 15 65. Allison: 66. Yavuz:  ----  Did you ever think about how huge the Universe really is? We’re merely one small part of an Jill: enormous system.  I’d recommend you to study the latter since it is a language spoken worldwide, with official status in Ebru: a great number of countries, holding the second  No, I haven’t really given any thought to it. place only after English. M Yavuz: Allison:  ----  Wow, I didn’t know that it had that many speakers around the world. Ebru:  Oh, wow! That’s really fantastic. Tell me more. Jill:  Yes, and besides, I think you will find it much Yavuz: easier considering you can also speak French,  I can’t remember much now, but soon I'll share having an extensive amount of vocabulary in with you any information I learn. common. A) You probably haven’t thought about it before Y A) I am so much interested in languages and linguistics because you’ve never read much about this topic. that I want to learn about the evolution of languages but don’t know with what to start. B) Well, you really should think about it. Don’t you care about the Universe? B) My parents are going to support me if I plan to pursue an academic career abroad. But I can’t C)I don’t want to think about it anymore because it decide where to go to study. confuses me a lot. C)Do you have anyS idea which of the two is a more D)Are you even listening to me? Please try to pay appropriate place for an international student: Brazil more attention. or Argentina? E) Me neither, until I started taking this astronomy D)I was considering how it would be if I settled down in course. We’re learning a lot of interesting facts about a totally new country once I am done with the work outer space. and get retired. E) I have decided to take up learning a new foreign Ö language but I’m finding it a bit confusing to choose between German and Spanish. 16 67. Dilek: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en  Do you think the digital age will bring an end to yakın cümleyi bulunuz. libraries? 68. Crime is not unique to urban life, and violence Selin:  ---- occurs in families far more often than on the streets. Dilek: A) M Crime is not peculiar to cities, and there is more  I never thought about it like that. So, you mean violence at homes than on the streets. libraries actually encourage the digital age. Selin: B) Crime can be found everywhere except in cities, and  Exactly, the future offers hope by placing libraries street violence occurs less often than family in a broader context as key parts of the violence. information society rather than just rooms full of books. C)Crime is not limited to city life, and violence on the streets takes place a lot more frequently than among families. A) I don’t know, but to my mind, using a mouse to Y control a cursor is as important as learning to D)The source of crime in urban life comes from understand letters on a page. families in which violence occurs far more than on the streets. B) I am not certain whether tomorrow’s libraries will be able to offer access to the shared space of the E) Violence occurs not only in families but also on the network. streets, so urban life is not the only place where crime occurs. C)Today, some libraries are being handed over to voluntary groupsS or charities, so the answer of your questions depends on their steps. D)Sooner or later, we’ll find ourselves at a point in time where the library will either become extinct or evolve 69. When people suffer from difficulty in eating because into something fitter for the modern age. of illness, they are advised to have concentrated liquid formulas since they are easily swallowed. E) Definitely not. For me, they offer a lot more than just books; they are information centres and the Internet A) As concentrated liquid formulas do not cause any Ö access points for a wide community. difficulty in swallowing, people who find it hard to eat due to illness are advised to use them. B) Concentrated liquid formulas are very practical to swallow, so they are recommended to ill people, especially those who have problems with eating. C)If a person cannot eat easily because of illness, he or she should have concentrated liquid formulas, as illness affects them immensely. D)Illness may cause difficulty in eating, but people can overcome it using concentrated liquid formulas that are easy to swallow. E) Concentrated liquid formulas contribute a lot to solving the problem of eating resulting from illness, as they are convenient for easy swallowing. 17 70. The importance of language is not only that it allows 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada us to communicate, but also that it gives us an anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek identity, without which we would not know who we cümleyi bulunuz. are. 72. No one on the planet is going to escape the effects A) Language, through which we can communicate, is of global warming and for billions the resulting important to our knowledge of who we are because it environmental deterioration is going to make life gives us an identity. co M nsiderably more difficult. ---- The question is whether we will ever be able to achieve a worthwhile international consensus that allows us to do this B) The reason why language is important is not that it with any degree of effectiveness. allows us to communicate but that it enables us to have an identity with which we know who we are. A) Without US ratification, emissions from all the industrial countries could rise significantly soon. C)Language, with which we associate ourselves, is important because it both allows us to communicate and to know who we are. B) It is too late now to put the clock back, but we can at least attempt to reduce the worst impacts of global D)If it were not for language, with which we can warming. Y communicate and obtain our identity, we would not be able to know the importance of who we are. C)The more global warming continues to attract the public attention, the closer we are to finding a E) Language is important not only because it allows us solution. to communicate, but also because it provides us with an identity, which enables us to know who we are. D)The latter includes ways of using the oceans as a dumping ground for atmospheric carbon dioxide. S E) In terms of greenhouse gas emissions, things are getting steadily worse, not better. 71. The way that scientists compare colour vision in different types of animals is by counting the colour photoreceptors in their eyes. A) The colour vision of different animals can be compared by counting their photoreceptors, a method put forward by many scientists. Ö B) There are many ways of comparing the colour vision of different animals, yet scientists are mainly using one specific technique; counting the colour photoreceptors in their eyes. C)In order to compare different animals’ colour vision, scientists count the colour photoreceptors in the eyes of the animals. D)If anyone is interested in making a comparison among animals’ colour vision, they should count the colour photoreceptors in their eyes. E) The colour photoreceptors in the eyes of different animals give lots of information about their colour vision, according to the scientists. 18 73. One of the first microscopes was built by a 75. It was only about a century ago that Jules Verne lensmaker in the Netherlands in 1590. It was a fantasized about people travelling around the world simple device with one lens. In 1625, Italian scientist in only 80 days. Much of what we take for granted Galileo Galilei made the first compound microscope. today results from technology that has been ---- The magnified view appears as a so-called developed only within the last century. Before then, ‘virtual image’ behind the target. Many microscopes change occurred slowly. ---- Travellers commonly fly today also have a light source behind the target to from New York to London in six-and-a-half hours, illuminate it. anMd communications are almost instantaneous. A) It had one lens to create an image of the target and A) Demand for new products, services and technology another to make it bigger. has little impact on international transport. B) While it was very useful then, it did not take long for more advanced ones to come. B) Moreover, the cost of improved communications and transportation has risen more slowly than the speed C)Galilei, himself, did not believe that he could magnify of travel. views on lens. C)But conducting business on an international level D)This microscope gave the impression thaYt it could involves greater distances than it did in the previous pave the way for new microscopes. century. E) Microscopes have been used in a variety of fields D)Speed restrictions now make international business including forensics, metallurgy and medical more expensive to undertake. microbiology. E) In recent years, however, the pace of technological Sadvances has accelerated at a fast rate. 74. Between 4000 and 2000 BC, the first urban civilizations arose independently along the Tigris, the Nile, the Indus and the Yellow River. All of these great rivers are prone to seasonal variations in flow, with flood alternating with drought. ---- Once this technology was developed, farmers found that they could move into drier areas, such as southern Mesopotamia. Ö A) Archaeologists have found sites where one Sumerian city was built on top of an earlier one, separated by a layer of mud swept over in a flood. B) Although most humans lived in small hunting bands, some pre-farming peoples worked out a very different strategy of survival. C)To maximize agricultural production, it was necessary to build dams to store the flood waters in reservoirs to water the fields during the dry season. D)Constructing such schemes required an accurate calendar to predict when the floods would come, and a high degree of social organization. E) It was here that first people first began to cultivate crops, kick starting a global revolution in the way humans live. 19 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla 79. (I) The traditional image of the computer gamer is of a okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan teenage boy addicted to sitting in the dark in front of a cümleyi bulunuz. screen. (II) Actually, an increasing percentage of users and buyers of computer games are women, who are 76. (I) When US athlete Frank Jarvis clocked 11 seconds to thought to be attracted by the appearance of win the 100m at the Olympic final in Paris in 1900, it was sophisticated simulation games. (III) It has been argued considered a miracle. (II) Today, such a time would not that unlike film or television, computers permit greater even qualify an athlete for the English Schools Senior intMeraction between users. (IV) Furthermore, the majority Boys’ National Standard of 10.9 seconds. (III) So what of computer gamers have an avarage age around 30. has changed? (IV) The most significant factor is the (V) Some two-fifths of the most frequent players are over change in body shape in elite athletes – they have 35. longer legs and arms, and it gives them an advantage from the mid-point of the race onwards. (V) However, A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V swimmers have to use four times as much energy as runners to cover the same distance. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Y 80. (I) Sand particles and dust from the roads make up a large proportion of air pollution. (II) The composition of household dust will vary from place to place, but it mostly consists of organic matter that naturally comes 77. (I) Children, like adults, use three visible cues – race, off people, pets, plants and anything else that lives in gender and age – to arrange their social world. (II) The our homes. (III) The main components include human next step might be to see whether living in multilingual skin flakes, fibres from plants, clothing and furnishings, countries can change this early tendency. (III) They smoke and oil droplets from cooking. (IV) Our hobbies prefer to make friends with kids similar to them based also add a personal signature to house dust. S on these traits. (IV) New research, however, shows that (V) Woodworkers have wood dust in their homes, cooks language accents may be equally important in guiding make savoury dust, while readers produce papery youngsters’ social decisions. (V) In fact, accents may be particles. even more meaningful than race in signifying whether someone belongs in your social group. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Ö 78. (I) Material that makes its way from short-term memory to long-term memory enters a storehouse of almost unlimited capacity. (II) Like a new file we save on a hard drive, the information in the long-term memory is filled and coded so that we can retrieve it when we need it. (III) Repeating a word several times, for example, is a popular strategy to keep information in short-term memory. (IV) Evidence of the existence of long-term memory comes from a number of sources. (V) For example, people with certain kinds of brain damage have no lasting recall of new information after the damage, although people and events stored in memory before the injury remain intact. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V TEST BİTTİ. 20 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. SINAVDA UYULACAK KURALLAR 1. Sınav salonları kamera ile kayıt altına alınacaktır. Kamera kayıtlarının incelenmesinden sonra sınav kuralla- rına uymadığı tespit edilen adayların sınavları Yönetim Kurulunca geçersiz sayılacaktır. 2. Cep telefonu ile sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Çağrı cihazı, telsiz, fotoğraf makinesi vb. araçlarla; cep bilgi- sayarı, kol veya cep saati gibi her türlü bilgisayar özelliği bulunan cihazlarla; silah ve benzeri teçhizatla; müsvedde kâğıdı, defter, kitap, sözlük, sözlük işlevi olan elektronik aygıt, hesap cetveli, hesap makinesi, pergel, açıölçer, cetvel vb. araçlarla sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Bu araçlarla sınava girmiş adayların adı mutlaka Salon Sınav Tuta- nağına yazılacak, bu adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacaktır. Sınava kalem, silgi, kalemtıraş, saat vb. araçla ve M kulaklık, küpe, broş vb. takı, herhangi bir metal eşya ile girmek de kesinlikle yasaktır. Yiyecek, içecek vb. tüketim malzemeleri de sınava getirilemez. Adaylar sınava şeffaf şişe içerisinde su getirebilecektir. 3. Bu sınav için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır. Sınav başladıktan sonra ilk 110 ve son 15 dakika içinde adayın sınavdan çıkmasına kesinlikle izin verilmeyecektir. Bu süreler dışında, cevaplamayı sınav bitmeden ta- mamlarsanız cevap kâğıdınızı ve soru kitapçığınızı salon görevlilerine teslim ederek salonu terk edebilirsiniz. Bildirilen sürelere aykırı davranışlardan adayın kendisi sorumludur. 4. Sınav salonundan ayrılan aday, her ne sebeple olursa olsun, tekrar sınava alınmayacaktır. 5. Sınav süresince görevlilerle konuşmak, görevlilere soru sormak yasaktır. Aynı şekilde görevlilerin de adaylarla ya- kından ve alçak sesle konuşmaları ayrıca adayların birbirinden kalem, silgi vb. şeyleri istemeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. Y 6. Sınav sırasında, görevlilerin her türlü uyarısına uymak zorundasınız. Sınavınızın geçerli sayılması, her şeyden önce, sınav kurallarına uymanıza bağlıdır. Kurallara aykırı davranışta bulunanların ve yapılacak uyarılara uymayanların kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. 7. Sınav sırasında kopya çeken, çekmeye kalkışan, kopya veren, kopya çekilmesine yardım edenlerin kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve bu adayların sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. Adayların test sorularına verdikleri cevapların dağılımları bilgi işlem yöntemleriyle incelenecek, bu incelemelerden elde edilen bulgular bireysel veya toplu olarak kopya çekildiğini gösterirse kopya eylemine katılan adayın/adayların sınavı S geçersiz sayılacak ayrıca 2 yıl boyunca tarafından düzenlenen tüm sınavlara başvurusu yasaklanabilecektir. Sınav görevlileri bir salondaki sınavın, kurallara uygun biçimde yapılmadığını, toplu kopya girişiminde bulunulduğu- nu raporlarında bildirdiği takdirde, bu salonda sınava giren tüm adayların sınavını geçersiz sayabilir. 8. Cevap kâğıdında doldurmanız gereken alanlar bulunmaktadır. Bu alanları doldurunuz. Cevap kâğıdınızı başkaları tarafından görülmeyecek şekilde tutmanız gerekmektedir. Cevap kâğıdına yazılacak her türlü yazıda ve yapılacak bütün işaretlemelerde kurşun kalem kullanılacaktır. Sınav süresi bittiğinde cevapların cevap kâğıdına işaretlenmiş olması gerekir. Soru kitapçığına işaretlenen cevaplar geçerli değildir. Ö 9. Soru kitapçığınızı alır almaz kapağında bulunan ilgili alanları doldurunuz. Size söylendiği zaman sayfaların eksik olup olmadığını, kitapçıkta basım hatalarının bulunup bulunmadığını ve soru kitapçığının her sayfasında basılı bulu- nan soru kitapçık numarasının, kitapçığın ön kapağında basılı soru kitapçık numarasıyla aynı olup olmadığını kontrol ediniz. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfası eksik veya basımı hatalıysa değiştirilmesi için salon başkanına başvurunuz. Size verilen soru kitapçığının numarasını cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru Kitapçık Numarası” alanına yazınız ve kodlayınız. Cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru kitapçık numaramı doğru kodladım.” kutucuğunu işaretleyiniz. Soru kitapçığı üzerinde yer alan Soru Kitapçık Numarasını doğru kodladığınızı beyan eden alanı imzalayınız. 10. Sınav sonunda soru kitapçıkları toplanacak ve ’de incelenecektir. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfalarını koparmayı- nız. Soru kitapçığının bir sayfası bile eksik çıkarsa sınavınız geçersiz sayılacaktır. 11. Cevap kâğıdına ve soru kitapçığına yazılması ve işaretlenmesi gereken bilgilerde bir eksiklik ve/veya yanlışlık ol- ması hâlinde sınavınızın değerlendirilmesi mümkün olamamaktadır, bu husustaki özen yükümlülüğü ve sorumluluk size aittir. 12. Soru kitapçığının sayfalarındaki boş yerleri müsvedde için kullanabilirsiniz. 13. Soruları ve/veya bu sorulara verdiğiniz cevapları ayrı bir kâğıda yazıp bu kâğıdı dışarı çıkarmanız kesinlikle yasaktır. 14. Sınav salonundan ayrılmadan önce, soru kitapçığınızı, cevap kâğıdınızı ve sınava giriş belgenizi salon görevli- lerine eksiksiz olarak teslim etmeyi unutmayınız. Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve doğacak tüm mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ (7 EYLÜL 2014) İNGİLİZCE M 1. D 21. A 41. A 61. E 2. E 22. A 42. B 62. A 3. A 23. D 43. C 63. D 4. C 24. D 44. D 64. A Y 5. A 25. C 45. E 65. E 6. B 26. E 46. B 66. E 7. A 27. A 47. B 67. E S 8. C 28. A 48. C 68. A 9. A 29. A 49. C 69. A 10. D 30. D 50. D 70. E Ö11. A 31. B 51. B 71. C 12. B 32. A 52. B 72. B 13. A 33. A 53. C 73. A 14. C 34. D 54. C 74. C 15. A 35. A 55. C 75. E 16. E 36. C 56. B 76. E 17. A 37. A 57. A 77. B 18. D 38. B 58. A 78. C 19. A 39. E 59. C 79. C 20. C 40. B 60. A 80. A T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (İlkbahar Dönemi) 5 NİSAN 2015 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S AÇIKLAMA Ö 1. Bu soru kitapçığındaki test 80 sorudan oluşmaktadır. 5. Bu sınavın değerlendirilmesi doğru cevap sayısı üzerinden yapılacak, yanlış cevaplar dikkate alın- mayacaktır. 2. Bu test için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır (2,5 saat). 6. Cevaplamaya istediğiniz sorudan başlayabilirsiniz. Bir soru ile ilgili cevabınızı, cevap kâğıdında o soru için ay- 3. Testteki her sorunun sadece bir doğru cevabı vardır. Bir rılmış olan yere işaretlemeyi unutmayınız. soru için birden çok cevap yeri işaretlenmişse o soru yanlış cevaplanmış sayılacaktır. 7. Sınavda uyulacak diğer kurallar bu kitapçığın arka ka- pağında belirtilmiştir. 4. İşaretlediğiniz bir cevabı değiştirmek istediğinizde, sil- me işlemini çok iyi yapmanız gerektiğini unutmayınız. İNGİLİZCE TESTİ Bu testte 80 soru vardır. 5. By 2008, the UK had begun to return to nuclear 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. power by ---- the construction of new reactors. M A)calling for B)turning over C)putting off 1. For years, information systems experts have faced the ---- of convincing business managers of the value they provide to the organizations. D)taking apart E) pulling up A)challenge B)appreciation C)consciousness D)assurance E) designation 6. From the ancient pyramids to today’s hi-tech skyscrapers, powerful people have always ---- their Y status through impressive buildings. A)put on B)laid out C)shown off 2. Although including children with special needs in learning environments with their typical peers presents many obstacles, the rewards, benefits and D)given in E) passed over teamwork make it ----. A)worthwhile B)legitimate C)obligatory S D)questionable E) implicit 3. Herbal treatment administered in a medical context has been shown to induce relief from ptoms in Ö an ---- wide range of illnesses including allergies, asthma, cancer, depression, diabetes and migraine. A)impressively B)accurately C)eventually D)unbearably E) exclusively 4. Total world population seems to have ---- around a level of approximately half a billion people until the modern period, when it began to climb steadily. A)appeared B)expired C)qualified D)fluctuated E) weakened 1 9. Philosophy did not play a large part in Roman 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. culture, other than Stoicism, which ---- by the Romans for its emphasis on virtuous conduct and ---- one’s duty. 7. It ---- fourteen years since his last feature film, Ryan’s Daughter, when David Lean ---- to A) is to be admired / to have done filmmaking with his 1984 adaptation of E. M. Forster’s celebrated novel, A Passage to India. M B) is admired / to do A) had been / returned C)had been admired / having done B) has been / had returned D)was admired / doing C)was / returns E) could be admired / being done D)will be / would return Y E) is / has returned 10. As a young officer, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was critical ---- the government of the Ottoman Empire and became involved ---- the Committee of Union and Progress. 8. Behind every architectural masterpiece ---- a brand new technology without which these structures ---- a A)to / for B)of / with C)at / upon few years ago. S A) has been / did not have to be built D)from / in E) toward / under B) is / could not have been built C)had been / would not have been built 11. The ultimate goal ---- medical profession is not to replace whole organs but to repair damaged organs Ö D)was / need not have been built ---- healthy cells. A) of / over E) will be / should not have been built B) to / on C)for / with D)against / into E) behind / towards 2 12. Digital media communication differs significantly 16. Prejudice may be expressed by people who have from conventional marketing communication ---- developed generally negative personalities, perhaps digital media enable new forms of interaction and ---- being raised in harsh and restrictive families. new models for information exchange. A)as a result of B)in terms of C)rather than A)although B)since C)only if D)in contrast with E) in place of M D)in case E) even if 13. The mouth is the first part of the digestive system, where food is broken and chewed ---- it can easily be swallowed. A)so that B)since C)just as Y D)as long as E) once 14. Fire was essential for the growth of human civilization ---- people used it to cook their food, S warm their homes, clear woodland for cultivation, make pottery, and eventually melt metals for ores. A)unless B)even if C)whenever D)as E) in case Ö 15. Japan is enormously centralized, and Tokyo, the capital city, hosts ---- the national government ---- the stock market and the world’s largest companies. A)not only / but also B)whether / or C)neither / nor D)such / that E)the more / the less 3 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 20. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)However B)In addition The right side of the brain is not actually related to being more creative. At least, not in the popular sense that C)Thus D)For instance creative people are more 'right-brained' than logical or analytical people are. A study that scanned the brains of 1,000 people (17)---- no such differences. It is true ME)Accordingly that different brain areas are specialised (18)---- different tasks, including vision, hearing, touch and the control of movement. And the (19)---- language areas are in the left hemisphere in 95 percent of right-handers. (20)----, both hemispheres work together in almost everything we do and creativity is a 21. whole-brain process. Painters and sculptors may draw A)as well as B)because of on mathematical and logical ideas (21)---- visual imagery and words, just as scientists inventing a new theory may do the reverse. C)contrary to D)in case of Y E)for the sake of 17. A)was finding B)finds C)had found S D)found E) will find 18. A) off B) for C)from D)away E) upon Ö 19. A)sensitive B)immense C)total D)genetic E)main 4 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 25. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)deal with B)rely on C)agree upon Along with prosperity and peace, the European Union has brought its citizens unprecedented opportunities D)hand over E) hold up and freedom to study, work, travel and trade (22)---- Europe’s borders. The EU has helped strengthen democracy, human rights and legal reforms in many M member states and aspiring candidate countries (23)---- continuing its original role as a mechanism for peace. But the EU’s founding rules and 26. institutions (24)---- for a far smaller union and it now risks suffocation under its own weight and becoming A)as B)even if C)if only one large dysfunctional family. Replacing the old constitutional norms or creating a new treaty to D)unless E) although (25)---- the complex 28-member union will be an imperative. Furthermore, future enlargement will remain a contentious issue (26)---- the EU absorbs its newest members and the next wave of candidates fuels the Y ongoing debate about who can join and where the ultimate boundaries of Europe lie. 22. S A)within B)under C)among D)alongside E) into Ö 23. A)in spite of B)as opposed to C)except for D)in addition to E) such as 24. A)can be designed B)were designed C)are being designed D)would be designed E)are to be designed 5 30. Even though reason is insufficient for being the 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. source of morality, ----. A) morality consists solely in the relation of actions to the 27. Established originally in the 18thcentury to make rule of right medicinal chocolates, ----. B) it plays an essential role in justifying moral decisions A) chocolate factories were to remain small-scale and M conventional small industries for two centuries C)what exists in the nature of things is the equality of our B) other inventive methods were busily engaged in judgement revolutionizing the chocolate industry D)no one reasons concerning another’s beauty, but the C)chocolate was introduced to Switzerland by Italian justice or injustice of his actions merchants in 1750 E) moral relations are determined by the comparison of D)milk chocolate was born in Switzerland, earning an action to a rule worldwide fame for the country E) fashionable beverage consumption was tYhe latest trend in the chocolate houses of London 31. Although the pearl collection industry collapsed as a result of the economic change in the early 1930s, ----. 28. While you can easily rent a car and drive around A) the natural resources lost their attraction centre Morocco, ----. A) the road regulations can be quite confusing B) many of its characteristic features and practices Ssurvive B) the local drivers are often courteous C)pearl is still found in many oyster beds in open seas C)even the exploration of cities on foot is easier D)other developments worsened this change D)the land and culture offer exciting experiences E) the unknown pearl areas may just be discovered by underwater historians Ö E) they charge a fixed rate and a small commission 32. Malaria, a mosquito-borne disease, is one of the greatest threats to human health, ----. 29. ---- unless they are heading back to their birthplace. A) so mosquitoes find their victims easily thanks to their excellent sense of smell A) Money is an important aspect when migrants decide to leave their home country B) although there is hardly any chance of surviving a severe attack of malaria without drugs B) There are now more humanitarian groups providing assistance around the world C)as deaths from malaria have fallen more than 25 percent over the last decade C)People usually do not move to lower-income countries D)but a mosquito can transfer hundreds of parasites with a bite D)Governments should do something to stop massive immigration E) and scientists are struggling to defeat it by finding new ways to fight mosquitoes E) Highly-skilled people are always in great demand and attract foreign aid 6 33. Within the following years, satellites capable of 36. In academic fields such as literature, music and art, monitoring what people are doing will be coming the emphasis is frequently on individual tests, online ----. personal opinions and other subjective judgments ----. A) so that polluters will easily be spotted from space and penalized A) whereas the emphasis is on objectivity in psychology and other natural sciences B) because it is vital to come up with big ideas about M small satellites B) only if natural sciences focus on objectivity and social interaction C)in spite of the fact that there is a team of researchers working on detecting carbon dioxide levels from space C)unless the target of academic inquiry necessitates the researcher to repeat the experiment D)although penalties for adding pollution to the atmosphere have become more strict D)so that professors spend more time on testing hypotheses E) even if the goal of developing a better understanding of what causes pollution most is achieved E) as though natural sciences involve neither subjectivity nor objectivity Y 34. Aristophanes, who is a popular ancient Greek comic playwright, is believed to have written thirty plays, ----. A) though his work is still very influential in the development of Western comedy S B) but only less than half of them survive, of which Lysistrata, written in 411 BC, is the most famous C)given that his plays generally deal with an antiwar theme D)even though many of his plays took their name from different themes ÖE) because comic authors in general do not have a high status in society 35. ----, other changes such as habitat destruction and hunting threaten individual species. A) Although volcanoes erupt and meteorites hit the Earth B) While global warming, acid rain and holes in the ozone layer can affect the entire life on the planet C)Because life first appeared on the Earth more than 3,5 billion years ago D)As soon as atmospheric gases become part of the water cycle and are carried by the wind E) Though it is difficult to adapt to the harmful materials released into the environment 7 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye 38. Though international security and global economics anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye constitute the two major traditional issue areas in anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. world politics, some academics now claim that the environment has emerged as the third major issue 37. Since the reality reflected in documentaries is not area. natural, documentary filmmakers are aware that their choices shape the meaning they want to A) Uluslararası güvenlik ve küresel ekonominin dünya convey. Msiyasetindeki iki büyük geleneksel sorun olduğu düşünülse de, bazı akademisyenler tarafından A) Belgesellerde yansıtılan gerçeklik doğal olmadığı için çevrenin de üçüncü büyük sorun olarak ortaya çıktığı belgesel film yapımcıları, tercihlerinin vermek iddia edilmektedir. istedikleri anlamı şekillendirdiğinin farkındadırlar. B) Uluslararası güvenlik ve küresel ekonomi dünya siyasetinde geleneksel olarak iki önemli sorun alanını B) Belgesel film yapımcıları, tercihlerinin vermek teşkil etse de, bazı akademisyenlere göre çevre, artık istedikleri anlamı şekillendirdiğinin ve bu yüzden üçüncü büyük sorun alanını teşkil etmektedir. belgesellerde ortaya konan gerçekliğin doğal olmadığının farkındadırlar. C)Uluslararası güvenlik ve küresel ekonomi dünya siyasetindeki iki büyük geleneksel sorun alanını teşkil C)Belgesel film yapımcılarının tercihleri ve vermek Yetse de, bazı akademisyenler çevrenin artık üçüncü istedikleri anlamla şekillenen belgesellerde yansıtılan büyük sorun alanı olarak ortaya çıktığını iddia gerçeklik doğal değildir. etmektedirler. D)Uluslararası güvenlik ve küresel ekonomi dünya D)Belgesel film yapımcılarının vermek istedikleri anlam, siyasetinin iki büyük geleneksel sorun alanını teşkil tercihlerini şekillendirdiğinde belgesellerde sunulan etmektedir ancak bazı akademisyenlerce çevrenin gerçeklik doğal olmaktan uzaklaşır. artık üçüncü büyük sorun alanını teşkil ettiği iddia edilmektedir. E) Belgesel film yapSımcıları, belgesellerde yansıtılan E) Uluslararası güvenlik ve küresel ekonomi dünya gerçekliğin doğal olmadığının farkında oldukları için tercihlerini vermek istedikleri anlama göre siyasetinde iki büyük geleneksel sorun alanı olsa da, şekillendirirler. bazı akademisyenler üçüncü büyük sorun alanının da çevre olduğunu iddia etmektedirler. Ö 8 39. Bacteria are an essential part of the life cycle 41. Mısırlılar, sadece gökyüzünün haritasını çıkarmakla because they feed on dead matter, decomposing it kalmayıp gözlemledikleri yıldızların bazılarına isim and recycling many of the chemical constituents. de veren ilk antik uygarlıklardan biriydi. A) Bakteriler, ölü maddeleri ayrıştırarak ve kimyasal A) The Egyptians were one of the first ancient cultures to bileşenlerin çoğunu geri dönüştürerek bu not only map the sky but to name some of the stars maddelerle beslendiklerinden yaşam döngüsünün they observed. temel bir parçasıdır. M B) It was the ancient Egypt culture that both mapped the B) Yaşam döngüsünün temel bir parçası sky and named some of the stars they observed. olan bakteriler, ölü maddeleri ayrıştırıp kimyasal bileşenlerin çoğunu geri dönüştürür ve bu C)The culture of ancient Egypt was sophisticated enough maddelerle beslenir. to map the sky and name some of the stars they observed. C)Beslenmek için ölü maddelerin kimyasal bileşenlerinin çoğunu geri dönüştürüp bu maddeleri D)Having named some of the stars they observed, the ayrıştırdıklarından bakteriler, yaşam döngüsünün Egyptians were one of the first ancient cultures to map temel bir parçası durumundadır. the sky. E) If Egyptians had mapped the sky, they would have D)Ölü maddeleri ayrıştırıp kimyasal bileşenlerinin çoğunu Y become one of the first ancient cultures to name some geri dönüştürerek beslenen bakteriler, yaşam of the stars they observed. döngüsünün temel bir parçasıdır. E) Ölü maddeleri ayrıştıran ve kimyasal bileşenlerinin çoğunu geri dönüştüren bakteriler, yaşam döngüsünün temel bir parçası olan bu maddelerle beslenir. 42. Otoyollardan hızlı trenlere varıncaya kadar şehirler arasındaki ulaşım bağlantıları ticari kuruluşların ülke çapında başarı elde etmesine imkân sağlar. S 40. Kişilik testlerinin, gelecekteki kariyer başarısını A) It is transport links between cities such as motorways tahmin etmede tavsiye mektuplarından, and high-speed trains that enable businesses to be mülakatlardan ve eğitim sertifikalarından daha iyi successful across a country. olduğuna yaygın olarak inanılıyor. B) Transport links between cities, from motorways to high-speed trains, contribute to the success of A) It is widely believed that personality tests are better businesses countrywide. predictors of future career success than letters of recommendation, interviews and educational C)What makes businesses successful throughout a Öcertificates. country is transport links between cities like motorways and high-speed trains. B) People widely believe that personality tests better predict future career success than letters of D)Businesses can become more successful countrywide recommendation, interviews and educational thanks to transport links between cities such as certificates do. motorways and high-speed trains. C)It is widely believed that personality tests will replace E) From motorways to high-speed trains, transport links letters of recommendation, interviews and educational between cities allow businesses to achieve success certificates in terms of predicting future career countrywide. success. D)People widely believe that personality tests can better predict future career success, so there is no need to use letters of recommendation, interviews and educational certificates any more. E) In predicting future career success people widely believe personality tests are better tools than letters of recommendation, interviews and educational certificates. 9 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. It is clearly stated in the passage that cevaplayınız. recently-developed practices ----. A) have made it possible to buy a bouquet of flowers Growing orchids could change your lifeforever! It has inexpensively for many people. No other plant family offers the number and diversity of breathtaking and intriguing B) are used to increase the popularity of pot plants flowers that orchids do. When you discover that you can including poinsettia actually grow these exotic plants in your home and that M they are not expensive, your resistance will be lowered C)have brought down orchid prices considerably, making and your chances of catching the extremely contagious it obtainable for even ordinary people but wonderful obsession called the ‘Orchid Bug’ are high. In England, and the rest of Europe in Victorian D)are preferred by florists so that flowers can bloom in times, these fabulous plants used to be only for the eyes much shorter times than normal of royalty or well-heeled aristocrats because of the one-time astronomical prices they commanded at flower E) have earned orchids a variety of new awards for their auctions. They were grown in elaborate and costly quality glasshouses, usually by a staff of professional growers. However, as times have changed, orchids have entered the mainstream. They are now the second most popular Y pot plant in the world and are gaining quickly on the leader (poinsettia)! Because of new techniques and 45. The author mainly aims to ----. modern growing methods, award-quality orchids are available to everyone at prices lower than ever before. You can buy an orchid plant in full bloom for less than A) explain the success brought about by the new you would pay for a bouquet of flowers from the florist. technique of growing pot plants In addition to the orchids of today being less expensive, they are also much easier to grow. Some bloom more B) give readers some information on the future of orchids than once a year and others have a pleasant smell. And with thousands of hSybrids and new ones being produced all the time, there is an orchid that will strike anyone’s C)provide readers with a comparison between orchids and everyone’s fancy. and other pot plants D)describe the life-changing benefits of growing orchids at home E) present readers with an insight into what it cost to have orchids during Victorian times Ö43. According to the passage, ‘Orchid Bug’ ----. A) is a type of irrepressible desire people may have when they learn how easy and inexpensive it is to take care 46. What could be the best title for the passage? of orchids B) is experienced by orchid-growing people who have A) Where Orchids Come From experienced changes in their lives thanks to the plant C)dates back to the Victorian era, when it was extremely B) What Makes an Orchid an Orchid expensive to have orchids D)can be defined as the inability to resist owning an C)Welcoming Orchids into Your Life expensive but an easy-to-care-for orchid E) is a condition used to describe people who are willing D)Understanding How to Grow Orchids to pay high prices for orchids at auctions in England E) Choosing the Right Orchid 10 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. According to the passage, as Chinese people think cevaplayınız. that kites are lucky, they ----. A) attach musical instruments to kites so that they make The kite was first invented in China about 3,000 years sound as they fly ago. The first recorded construction of a kite was by the Chinese philosopher Mo Zi, who spent three years B) decorate the kites they make with mythical figures building it from wood. Materials ideal for kite building, such as silk for the sail material and bamboo for a M strong, light frame, were plentiful in China, and kites C)design their kites not only in rectangular shape but were soon used for many purposes. They were used to also in a variety of shapes measure distances, to test the wind, and to communicate during military maneuvers. The earliest D)have special ceremonies where they fly kites as a Chinese kites were often fitted with musical instruments ritual in their national festivals to create sound as they were flown; they were decorated with mythical bols. The first kites were flat and E) fly kites to provide some kind of protection rectangular in shape, but kites are now designed in a for themselves against bad spirits variety of forms. Kites flown as hobby are particularly popular in Asia, where kite flying is a ritual incorporated into the national festivals of many countries. The Chinese people believe that kites are lucky, Y so they fly 49. It is stated in the passage that recently, the kite ----. them to ward off evil spirits. In modern times as well, the kite has been used in important scientific research, A) has been useful in several modern inventions and including Benjamin Franklin’s famous experiment to discoveries prove that lightening is electricity. An experiment with a kite in the shape of a biplane helped the Wright brothers B) has been solely used as a leisure time activity achieve their dream of making the world’s first controlled human flight in 1903. Modern kites have been used to C)has been flown mainly on national festivals in Asian pull sledges over snow-covered terrain in the Antarctic. countries S D)has found a place for itself mainly in China E) has been widely used in measuring distances in many 47. According to the passage, one reason for the spread Asian countries of kite use for different functions was that ----. A) the Chinese philosopher Mo Zi was the first person 50. What could be the best title for this passage? interested in constructing a kite Ö A) Decoration of Kites in Different Parts of the World B) Chinese people needed something to test the direction of the wind B) The Development and Use of the Kite Throughout C)China at that time was engaged in a lot of wars where History they needed to use the kite for communication C) The Importance of Kites in Asian Festivals D)perfect materials to make a kite were abundantly available in China D)Chinese Contribution to the Construction of Kite E) people in China had been trying for thousands of years to come up with a method to measure distances E) How We Use Kites in Our Modern World 11 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. According to the passage, in conventional keyhole cevaplayınız. surgery, ----. A) the surgeon’s hands enter the patient’s body An amazing development in keyhole surgery has been the use of remotely-operated robots to perform minimally invasive procedures. Keyhole surgery means B) incisions are larger than those in robotic surgery that the surgeon’s hands do not need to be inside the patient – all cuts and stitches are carried out by delicate M instruments inserted through the keyhole incisions. This C)very few instruments are used during operations has made it possible for these instruments to be operated mechanically by a surgeon at a console that does not necessarily need to be in the same room, the D)surgeons might have a rest during operations same hospital – or indeed, the same country. In 2000, the US Federal Drug Administration approved a robotic keyhole system called ‘da Vinci’ for clinical use. In E) manual movements are much more restricted conventional keyhole surgery, the surgeon must stand and transfer his gaze between the instruments and the display screen. However, da Vinci allows the surgeon to be seated – for greater comfort during lengthy 53. It is understood from the passage that ----. Y procedures. Two endoscopes give full stereoscopic vision, while hand and foot controls are used to operate the instruments simultaneously and with greater range A) da Vinci is a robotic surgeon that is able to carry out of movement than that permitted by human hand and operations on its own wrist joints. In the future, a top surgical specialist in the US could operate on an injured soldier on a faraway B) conventional keyhole surgery is highly suitable for battlefield. lengthy and tiring operations C)surgeons have to stand up while carrying out an Soperation in robotic keyhole surgery D)in robotic surgery surgeons can use their four limbs 51. It is stated in the passage that ----. during the operation E) the use of remotely operated robots in surgery is a A) the US Federal Drug Administration’s approval of da mainstream practice in the US Vinci paved the path to robotic surgery B) conventional keyhole surgery is different from robotic Ökeyhole surgery in that it takes less time 54. One can infer from the passage that ----. C)one advantage of robotic keyhole surgery is that it is A) thanks to technological developments in medical more comfortable for the surgeon surgery it is less stressful for surgeons to operate on D)conventional keyhole surgery is less tiring to carry out patients for lengthy periods for surgeons since they use less equipment B) new medical technologies will eventually make it possible to carry out operations without any need for E) in conventional keyhole surgery surgeons have to be medical professionals in the future seated to pay attention to the equipment C)the US is making serious investments in developing innovative medical equipment in order to enable surgeons to operate from distant locations D)new technological developments in medical operations enable surgeons to do their work more precisely and without restrictions of space E) keyhole surgery is so accurate and comfortable that most surgeons will soon carry out operations using such minimally invasive methods 12 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. According to the passage, it is one thing for the cevaplayınız. public to welcome cheap drugs, it is another to ----. A) persuade countries such as China to stop deceiving It is not just the rights to solid, visible property that need the consumers to be protected; ownership of invisible property such as ideas and artistic creations also require protection. An B) support emerging economies in their actions inventor has little incentive to innovate if he knows that his invention will be seized from him – depriving him of M any reward for his work – as soon as it is finished. So, C)discard some of the sanctions on companies making for an economy to function properly, governments have counterfeit drugs to ensure they have a stable system of patents and other intellectual property rights. Copyright, for example, D)be watchful of the effects and quality of these drugs protects writers, for a set period of time, against plagiarism. Intellectual property rights have come under great scrutiny in recent years thanks to the rise of E) tell them that some of these drugs were actually made emerging economies such as China and India. In such in the West countries, regulations and laws on intellectual property and common standards have proven hard to uphold. As a result, companies have been able to produce, for Y example, cheap and unlicensed versions of drugs based on the research and development of Western 57. It can be understood from the passage that the pharmacological companies. Although consumers protection of invisible property ----. initially welcomed such projects, there have subsequently been several scares over whether goods A) has been recently discussed among people such as produced in these countries can be trusted. For inventors and writers instance, some counterfeit drugs produced in China have turned out to have no effect, or even to be harmful. B) deserves more consideration than the protection of Hence, there must be strict regulations regarding both visible property the use and selling Sof these drugs. C)directly increases the complexity with which an economy functions D)disturbs a stable system of patent-giving mechanisms E) may encourage inventors to produce innovative works 55. One can understand from the passage that ----. Ö A) upholding invisible copyrights has a potential danger of jeopardizing the health of poor people B) copyrights to solid, visible property tend to be 58. It is stated in the passage that the issue of observed by the emerging economies in Asia intellectual property rights ----. A) has become more important since companies in C)for an economy to be protected, governments have to developing countries gain undeserved profit from the simplify their laws on patents and copyrights expertise of Western research D)neglecting intellectual property rights can discourage B) inevitably brings up the issue of how willing the innovation and may risk public health emerging economies of China and India are to redefine regulations E) emerging economies are particularly careful about adhering to intellectual copyright laws C)has long been respected even in emerging economies of the countries like China and India D)is largely on the agenda of Western pharmacological companies which invest in research and development E) is more often debated in reference to cheap but trustworthy versions of drugs produced by Indian and Chinese companies 13 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. It is understood from the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A) scientists are pessimistic about the chances of cloning In February 1997, newspapers around the world cows reported the birth in Edinburgh, Scotland, of a lamb named Dolly. Such an event would not normally be B) the birth of Dolly paves the way for further scientific considered newsworthy. Even the fact that Dolly had an development identical twin would not typically have added much to M the story. But the event was truly a landmark in science, C)creating Dolly is like science-fiction rather than a because this lamb was not born in the usual way. scientific success Rather than being the product of a sperm and an egg from two parents, Dolly came into existence when the D)experiments on human cloning have been genetic material from an adult sheep was transplanted conducted recently into a cell that developed into an exact copy of that sheep. For the moment, most scientists are talking E) society will utilize cloning only when cloning of humans about relatively non-controversial applications of the becomes legal technology – such as cloning cows that are especially good milk producers. It is undoubtedly just a matter of time before the technology is in place to create copies of Y other humans from the DNA in the nucleus of a single cell. Consider the potential benefits to society. We could 61. According to the passage, one of the advantages of make perfect, but younger, copies of brilliant scientists, cloning is that ----. surgeons, or even chefs. Infertile couples could be helped to bear children, and genetic diseases could A) even infertile couples could have babies perhaps be cured or prevented by manipulating the structure of the genes causing them. The extraordinary birth of a lamb named Dolly serves as an appropriate B) cows could produce larger quantities of milk than they entry into the relatively new and fascinating world of do currently human genetics. S C)we may not need any other skillful scientists or surgeons D)there will not be any diseases related to genes E) it may help eliminate the controversial uses of science 59. It can be understood from the passage that ----. and technology Ö A) the birth of Dolly has been reported in the local newspapers since 1997 B) the way Dolly was born made the birth quite difficult for 62. The author’s attitude towards cloning is ----. her mother C)Dolly was different from other lambs as she was a A)neutral B)pessimistic C)uncertain better milk producer D)sarcastic E) favouring D)the birth of Dolly was important because of the fact that she had a twin E) the birth of Dolly was impressive as she was the first of her kind 14 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Sami: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  I’ve always been fascinated by the idea of the bulunuz. discovery of an Earth-like planet for humans to live on. 63. Cavit:  I sometimes have difficulty in understanding what Feridun: genre means in the literary world.  ---- M Nuray: Sami:  It depends on where you’re positioned in the book  I didn’t know about that. Do you think they will be world. For a bookseller, it’s a shelving and successful in doing so? location issue. Feridun: Cavit:  Yes, but more research is needed. Even if they  ---- find an Earth-like planet with water, food might still be an issue if life on that planet were based Nuray: on a different biochemistry.  With fiction, for example, there will be classics, romance or horror sections. A) Me too, but only a few scientists think it’s possible. Y They’re trying to develop alternative life-support A) So it’s a pragmatic question of what to put where. systems. B) So have I, considering how exciting and interesting it B) I think fiction is always the best-selling line. would be to be visited by aliens from other planets. C)I totally agree with you. I think we aren’t alone in such C)But even in small bookstores, I get confused. thinking as I’ve read articles by scientists writing on Earth-like planets. S D)Bookstores say Westerns mostly attract male D)I don’t understand why you’re so interested in this customers. subject while even some astronomers don’t believe Earth-like planets exist. E) Then, a genre can have large number of dedicated readers. E) I also like dreaming about living on a new planet, as scientists now say the Earth is running out of its resources. Ö 15 65. Fevzi: 66. Zeliha:  I’ve always fancied being a writer and now my  How do you think our media consumption has dream is coming true thanks to a home-study changed over the last ten years? creative writing course. Hayri: Recep:  I feel that we’ve become more reliant on  ---- technological tools such as mobile phones and Mtablets in addition to TV. Fevzi:  Why not? I’m going to receive individual, personal Zeliha: tuition from a professional writer.  ---- Recep: Hayri:  I’m not really convinced though. He or she may  Yet, we shouldn’t miss the point that we’re also teach you the rules of the publishing world, but becoming enslaved since there’s more and more not provide the inspiration to produce. to discover now. A) Do you really think you can become a writer through A) So you mean people should decrease their TV viewing an online course? Yhours. B) Congratulations! Have you finally had the opportunity B) Yes, we’ve become so extravagant. Even children to realize your goal? have smart phones. C)Do you know if there is an age limit for attending the C)That’s why I don’t allow my kids to play computer course? games for long hours. D)Can’t it be also quite rewarding if you’re determined to D)In fact, it’s not completely true for the older generation. learn everything in detail? S E) Don’t misunderstand me, but shouldn’t you be looking E) That’s right. They give us the freedom to access for a different career? information anywhere and anytime we want. Ö 16 67. Emrullah: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en  We sometimes use certain polite expressions yakın cümleyi bulunuz. instead of offensive and unpleasant ones in order to show respect to others. 68. Regardless of how we form an impression of another person, we may relatively quickly develop Cemil: ideas about what the person is like.  Do you mean it’s like asking “Would you mind if I opened the window?” instead of saying “I’ll open M A) No matter how we form an idea about people, we are the window.”? rather quick in developing thoughts about their personality. Emrullah:  ---- B) We may be relatively fast in criticizing another person’s character concerning how we form Cemil: impressions of him or her.  Oh, I see. Politicians often do the same thing. For C)The idea we develop about another person has example, ‘user fees’ is the term they use for relatively much to do with the ways we form ‘taxes’. impressions of him or her. A) However, this all depends on whom you’Yre talking to. D)We are generally quick at developing an idea about We often try to be more polite while communicating people’s personalities irrespective of the ways we form with authority figures or our supervisors. impressions of them. B) Actually, we use them to refer to taboo topics like E) Even if we may have formed impressions of others in disability and death. Do you understand what I mean? different ways, they mostly depend on ideas we develop fairly quickly. C)Sure, but over-politeness can also disturb people and make them feel like you want to put a safe distance between you andS them. 69. Since we are both perpetrators and victims of D)I especially want to emphasize language change. environmental damage, humanity’s survival Some words lose their original meanings and gain new ultimately depends on our ability to preserve the ones depending on the context or tone. natural world. E) No, it’s more related to word choice and the connotations behind language. I’d rather use the term A) The future of humankind is finally to be decided by our ‘government officer’ than ‘civil servant’. resolve to preserve the environment as we are negatively affected when we damage it. Ö B) The reason why we destroy the natural world and are afflicted with its damage is that our survival relies on our capability to protect the environment. C)If we destroy nature and are badly affected by such devastation, our ability to protect the environment will eventually rely on the survival of humanity. D)As we are the ones who both destroy the environment and suffer from this destruction, the existence of humanity finally rests on how well we maintain the natural world. E) Given that we both destroy the natural world and suffer from it, our power to protect the environment ultimately fails to save our lives. 17 70. Throughout the history of mankind, there have been 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada many important innovations, from the first stone anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek tools that enabled people to hunt animals to radio cümleyi bulunuz. telescopes that can see into deep space. 72. Over the years scientists have hunted for some A) There were so many developments in history but two signal that would allow forecasters to pinpoint of them are very important: the first stone tools that exactly where and when an earthquake will hit. After made hunting animals possible and radio telescopes de M cades spent searching in vain, many that can see deep space. seismologists now doubt whether such a signal even exists. ---- Within seconds of an earthquake’s B) Among many innovations in the history of first subtle motions, scientists can now predict with mankind, there have been no greater developments some certainty how strong and widespread the than the preliminary stone tools to hunt animals and shaking will be. radio telescopes that enable man to investigate deep space. A) Nevertheless, not all hope is lost. C)There have been many significant developments since the beginning of history, ranging from the first stone B) This would put people out of the harm’s way. tools used by man for hunting animals to radio telescopes that can be used to observe dYeep space. C)This is enough to send shutdown warnings to power D)Nothing is as important as the first stone tools and plants. radio telescopes which have been helpful for humanity to hunt animals and see the deep space D)An earthquake early-warning system could provide a respectively. 20-second warning to the heart of the region. E) In the history of mankind, there is a great jump from E) The nationwide network issues warnings via most the first stone tools that allowed humans to hunt television and radio stations. animals to the radio telescopes that can see deep S space. 73. The brain analyzes the flood of incoming information, decides how to respond, and sends 71. While the trend is toward living in cities, there is still outgoing signals to muscles and other organs, a significant proportion of the population living in telling them what to do. ---- However, many parts of the countryside. the nervous system work automatically, controlling your internal organs and reflexes without your ÖA) People now want to live in cities more than they do in conscious awareness. the countryside because this is the latest trend. A) The nervous system has two main parts: the central B) Nowadays, many people prefer to live in the city nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. centres but more people are forced to live in the countryside because of the growing population. B) The nervous system in the human body is made up of billions of cells called neurons used for sending and C)In spite of the fact that living in cities is very popular, a receiving information. large number of people continue to live in the countryside. C)Nerve cells located almost everywhere in your body have long extensions called axons that can D)Living in the countryside is no longer trendy, and many stretch to 1 m in length. people want to stay in cities even though the population is growing dramatically. D)Much of your nervous system is under voluntary control, which means you can choose how to react. E) People who now reside in the countryside outnumber city dwellers because this is the new trend. E) While man-made wires carry power, the cells that make up the nervous system carry information. 18 74. In his renowned theory of relativity, the 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla German-born Nobel Prize-winning theoretical okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan physicist Albert Einstein discarded the now cümleyi bulunuz. discredited theory of ether and came to a 76. (I) The term ‘welfare state’ came into wide use in Britain conclusion: the speed of light remains constant, in the 1930s. (II) Though it is largely a twentieth-century regardless of a light source’s motion. ---- For phenomenon, its roots reach into the previous century. instance, as a rocket accelerates, time passes more (III) As the working-class population expanded in 1850s, slowly for the rocket, and its length shortens. M a number of British theorists began exploring ways to Conversely, from the rocket’s point of view, clocks confront the poverty of the working class and the on the Earth advance more quickly. unemployed. (IV) For example, John Stuart Mill was one of those who started the discussion of the need for a A) Instead, space and time are altered in accordance welfare state in Britain. (V) In a few countries, the with the object’s movement. twentieth-century welfare state began taking shape in the decades between World War I and World War II. B) Not only is the speed of light always and everywhere the same, it is also the absolute maximum speed limit. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V C)Albert Einstein, a great physicist, transformed our understanding of time and space. Y D)Mathematically, general relativity is much more complicated than special relativity. 77. (I) Since his first appearance in Action Comics in 1938, Superman has adapted to the changing times. (II) After E) Neither special nor general relativity is significant at the Second World War, he changed his slogan from the speeds achieved by cars, airplanes or high-speed fighting for ‘truth and justice’ to fighting for ‘truth, justice trains. and the American way’. (III) Such figures as Superman are seen as fulfilling the same societal function as the myths of ancient Greece or Rome. (IV) As the nation S grappled with the turmoil of the 1970s and embraced a more diverse culture, ‘self-sacrifice’ suddenly became 75. In the early 1980s, Israeli scientist Dan Shechtman part of Superman’s appeal. (V) As for the Superman of discovered that snow crystals could form in the first half of the 21st century, with his alter ego Clark structures that are ordered, but that have no Kent, he is likely to reflect our modern world, which is repeating pattern. ---- It turns out, he should not fearful of a collapse, whether economic or have worried as he was awarded the Nobel Prize for environmental. the work in 2011. The structures, now known as quasicrystals, resemble Moorish mosaics such as A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Öthose found in the Alhambra in Granada, Spain. A) Since Shechtman’s publication, hundreds of quasicrystals have been created in the laboratory. B) It was 100 years ago when the technique of X-ray 78. (I) It is perfectly normal and sensible for small children to diffraction, which Shechtman used a lot in his be afraid sometimes. (II) One of the most popular and studies, first allowed the detailed study of crystals. successful treatments for phobias is to think about that which frightens you most. (III) Children are mainly afraid C)The idea was so controversial that he did not publish of losing their parents or of becoming separated from his results for two years, fearing that no one would them. (IV) They are also afraid that something big might believe him. carry them away, and this was probably a realistic fear for our primitive ancestors. (V) It is wise for parents to D)Shechtman’s findings were not enough; the world had help them learn how to deal with fear. to wait until 2010 for a natural crystal to be identified. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V E) When he published his findings, Shechtman had to confront a lot of criticism. 19 79. (I) It used to be believed in longevity studies that the life span of a creature was roughly proportional to its body mass and heart rate. (II) New research, however, presents a more complicated picture. (III) It can be slow to find definitive answers in this field since the studies take a long time to do – a typical Galápagos tortoise, for instance, can outlast a scientist’s career. (IV) Bats and birds, for instance, are small but tend to live longer than M many larger creatures. (V) Moreover, when scientists look within particular species, size does not correlate well with life span, although fast growth is often associated with reduced longevity. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 80. (I) A maglev train might seem mysterious in Yaction, but the concept is easy to understand. (II) Magnets in the track are activated by the motion of the train and then are deactivated as soon as the train is gone. (III) While the concept has been applied to trains, right now its application to ships is still theoretical. (IV) Magnets on the bottom of the train and magnets on the track repel each other and the train rises a few inches above the track; individual magnetic fields of the guideway propel the train forward. (V)Maglev trains travel at nearly twice S the speed of conventional trains, use less energy, and cost less to maintain and run  partly because their operating mechanism involves almost no friction. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Ö TEST BİTTİ. 20 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. SINAVDA UYULACAK KURALLAR 1. Sınav salonunda saate entegre kamera ile kayıt yapılıyor ise; kamera kayıtlarının incelenmesinden sonra sınav kurallarına uymadığı tespit edilen adayların sınavları Yönetim Kurulunca geçersiz sayılacaktır. 2. Cep telefonu ile sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Her türlü elektronik/mekanik cihazla ve çağrı cihazı, telsiz, fotoğraf makinesi vb. araçlarla; cep bilgisayarı, her türlü saat ile, kablosuz iletişim sağlayan bluetooth, kulaklık vb. her türlü bilgisayar özelliği bulunan cihazlarla; her türlü kesici ve delici alet, ateşli silah vb. teçhizatla; kalem, silgi, kalemtıraş, müsvedde kâğıdı, defter, kitap, ders notu, sözlük, dergi, gazete vb. yayınlar, hesap makinesi, pergel, açıölçer, cetvel vb. araçlarla sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Sınava kolye, küpe, yüzük (alyans hariç), bilezik, broş, anahtar, anahtarlık, metal para gibi metal içerikli eşyalarla (basiMt başörtü iğnesi ve ince metal tokalı kemer hariç); plastik veya camdan yapılmış her türlü güneş gözlüğü ile (şeffaf/numaralı gözlük hariç), banka/kredi kartı ulaşım kartı vb. kartlarla; yiyecek, içecek (şeffaf pet şişe içerisindeki su hariç) ve diğer tüketim maddeleri ile gelmeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. Bu araçlarla sınava girmiş adayların adı mutlaka Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak, bu adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacaktır. Ancak, Başkanlığı tarafından belirlenen Engelli ve Yedek Sınav Evrakı Yönetim Merkezi (Y ) bina- larında sınava girecek olan engelli adayların sınava giriş belgelerinde yazılı olan araç gereçler, cihazlar vb. yukarıda belirtilen yasakların kapsamı dışında değerlendirilecektir. 3. Bu sınav için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır. Sınav başladıktan sonra ilk 110 ve son 15 dakika içinde adayın sınavdan çıkmasına kesinlikle izin verilmeyecektir. Bu süreler dışında, cevaplamayı sınav bitmeden ta- mamlarsanız cevap kâğıdınızı ve soru kitYapçığınızı salon görevlilerine teslim ederek salonu terk edebilirsiniz. Bildirilen sürelere aykırı davranışlardan adayın kendisi sorumludur. 4. Sınav salonundan ayrılan aday, her ne sebeple olursa olsun, tekrar sınava alınmayacaktır. 5. Sınav süresince görevlilerle konuşmak, görevlilere soru sormak yasaktır. Aynı şekilde görevlilerin de adaylarla ya- kından ve alçak sesle konuşmaları ayrıca adayların birbirinden kalem, silgi vb. şeyleri istemeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. 6. Sınav sırasında, görevlilerin her türlü uyarısına uymak zorundasınız. Sınavınızın geçerli sayılması, her şeyden önce, sınav kurallarına uymanıza bağlıdır. Kurallara aykırı davranışta bulunanların ve yapılacak uyarılara uymayanların kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. S 7. Sınav sırasında kopya çeken, çekmeye kalkışan, kopya veren, kopya çekilmesine yardım edenlerin kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve bu adayların sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. Adayların test sorularına verdikleri cevapların dağılımları bilgi işlem yöntemleriyle incelenecek, bu incelemelerden elde edilen bulgular bireysel veya toplu olarak kopya çekildiğini gösterirse kopya eylemine katılan adayın/adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacak ayrıca 2 yıl boyunca tarafından düzenlenen tüm sınavlara başvurusu yasaklanabilecektir. Sınav görevlileri bir salondaki sınavın, kurallara uygun biçimde yapılmadığını, toplu kopya girişiminde bulunulduğu- nu raporlarında bildirdiği takdirde, bu salonda sınava giren tüm adayların sınavını geçersiz sayabilir. 8. Cevap kâğıdında doldurmanız gereken alanlar bulunmaktadır. Bu alanları doldurunuz. Cevap kâğıdınızı başkaları Ö tarafından görülmeyecek şekilde tutmanız gerekmektedir. Cevap kâğıdına yazılacak her türlü yazıda ve yapılacak bütün işaretlemelerde kurşun kalem kullanılacaktır. Sınav süresi bittiğinde cevapların cevap kâğıdına işaretlenmiş olması gerekir. Soru kitapçığına işaretlenen cevaplar geçerli değildir. 9. Soru kitapçığınızı alır almaz kapağında bulunan alanları doldurunuz. Size söylendiği zaman sayfaların eksik olup olmadığını, kitapçıkta basım hatalarının bulunup bulunmadığını ve soru kitapçığının her sayfasında basılı bulunan soru kitapçık numarasının, kitapçığın ön kapağında basılı soru kitapçık numarasıyla aynı olup olmadığını kontrol ediniz. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfası eksik veya basımı hatalıysa değiştirilmesi için salon başkanına başvurunuz. Size verilen soru kitapçığının numarasını cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru Kitapçık Numarası” alanına yazınız ve kodlayınız. Cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru kitapçık numaramı doğru kodladım.” kutucuğunu işaretleyiniz. Soru kitapçığı üzerinde yer alan Soru Kitapçık Numarasını doğru kodladığınızı beyan eden alanı imzalayınız. 10. Sınav sonunda soru kitapçıkları toplanacak ve ’de incelenecektir. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfalarını koparmayı- nız. Soru kitapçığının bir sayfası bile eksik çıkarsa sınavınız geçersiz sayılacaktır. 11. Cevap kâğıdına ve soru kitapçığına yazılması ve işaretlenmesi gereken bilgilerde bir eksiklik ve/veya yanlışlık olma- sı hâlinde sınavınızın değerlendirilmesi mümkün değildir, bu husustaki özen yükümlülüğü ve sorumluluk size aittir. 12. Soru kitapçığının sayfalarındaki boş yerleri müsvedde için kullanabilirsiniz. 13. Soruları ve/veya bu sorulara verdiğiniz cevapları ayrı bir kâğıda yazıp bu kâğıdı dışarı çıkarmanız kesinlikle yasaktır. 14. Sınav salonundan ayrılmadan önce, soru kitapçığınızı, cevap kâğıdınızı ve sınava giriş belgenizi salon görevli- lerine eksiksiz olarak teslim etmeyi unutmayınız. 15. Sınav süresi salon görevlilerinin “SINAV BAŞLAMIŞTIR” ibaresiyle başlar, “SINAV BİTMİŞTİR” ibaresiyle sona erer. Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve doğacak tüm mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. O 001 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ (5 NİSAN 2015) İNGİLİZCE M 1. A 21. A 41. A 61. A 2. A 22. A 42. E 62. E 3. A 23. D 43. A 63. A 4. D 24. B 44. C 64. A Y 5. A 25. A 45. D 65. A 6. C 26. A 46. C 66. E 7. A 27. A 47. D 67. E S 8. B 28. A 48. E 68. A 9. D 29. C 49. A 69. D 10. B 30. B 50. B 70. C Ö11. C 31. B 51. C 71. C 12. B 32. E 52. E 72. A 13. A 33. A 53. D 73. D 14. D 34. B 54. D 74. A 15. A 35. B 55. D 75. C 16. A 36. A 56. D 76. E 17. D 37. A 57. E 77. C 18. B 38. C 58. A 78. B 19. E 39. A 59. E 79. C 20. A 40. A 60. B 80. C T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE ÖRNEK SORU KİTAPÇIĞI (Sonbahar Dönemi) 13 EYLÜL 2015 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S Ö İNGİLİZCE TESTİ Bu testte 80 soru vardır. 4. With mankind ---- by an energy crisis and climate 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. change, nuclear power is back on the scene. M A)confronted B)responded 1. The total amount of military ---- by all the countries of the world in 2010 was $1.63 trillion, which is C)surpassed D)initiated equivalent to $236 for every person on the planet. A)diversity B)requirement E)allowed C)expenditure D)dimension E)influence Y5. People have always been fascinated by the stars and planets in the night sky, but they had to ---- just the naked eye to make them out until the telescope was invented in 1609. 2. The speed of wind is measured by using the A) rely on B) look up Beaufort Scale, based on easily ---- factors such as tree movement, smoke behaviour and damage C)put off D) take up incurred. S A)hostile B)irrelevant E)bring back C)misleading D)additional E)observable 6. Blood type has been linked with a variety of mental disorders, but associations are weak; many other factors are more important in determining who ---- a Ö particular illness. 3. Today, contagious diseases rarely kill in developed A)runs out of B)ends up with countries, where improvements in sanitation and nutrition have ---- reduced premature deaths. C)makes up for D)gets back to A)favourably B)separately E)cuts down on C)significantly D)dangerously E)cautiously 1 10. Governments, organizations and businesses are 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. becoming increasingly concerned ---- social responsibility and ethical issues surrounding the problem ---- maintaining economic growth. 7. Costa Rica ---- the first country in Central America to grow coffee, and for the last 100 years, this ---- its A)with / of B)on / by leading export. A) is / was C)Minto / from D)for / beyond B) was / has been E)at / behind C)had been / used to be D)would be / had been 11. Personality psychology focuses on the consistency in people’s behaviour ---- time and the traits that E) could be / is differentiate one person ---- another. Y A)at / for B)over / from C)in / of D)within / by 8. Complex human language ---- suddenly and without progression; like other advanced capabilities, it ---- E)around / to in a series of stages. A) does not appear / can evolve S B) has not appeared / might evolve 12. Telecommunication companies install cell towers in places where the network will get sufficient use, C)did not appear / must have evolved ---- sparsely populated areas do not qualify, which means people there lack access to reliable phone service. D)will not appear / could have evolved A)in case B)even if E) had not appeared / should have evolved Ö C)so D)although E)just as 9. Many advanced nations ---- space exploration, and plans are under way ---- a human presence on Mars. A) begin / seeing 13. ---- the 50-second silent film Train Pulling Into A B) have begun / to see Station was first shown in 1895, people were so terrified by the locomotive racing towards them that they hurried to the back of the theatre. C)are beginning / to have seen A)Before B)Although D)began / being seen C)Since D)When E) had begun / having seen E)As if 2 14. Much evidence points to a relationship between stress and disease ---- claims that stressful life events and daily routines cause various diseases are still premature. A)since B)if C)once D)only when M E)but 15. Scientists do research in natural forces ---- for the sake of new discoveries ---- to use the findings for the advantage of mankind. Y A)not only / but also B)so / that C)the more / the more D)such / that E)whether / or S 16. One way to reduce the negative impact people have on the environment is to make sure that as much garbage as possible is recycled ---- being put in a landfill. A)because of B)in terms of C)for the sake of D)instead of Ö E)in case of 3 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 20. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)why B)where Some aeroplanes waste valuable fuel. (17)----, there are attempts to redesign such planes for maximum C)how D) what efficiency. Recently, two engineers(18)---- planes from the very beginning combining fuel efficiency, E)when aerodynamics and the necessities of goods, passengers M and fuel storage. Their final design seems to (19)---- several elements found in birds. They examined the three major parts that make a plane (20)----it is: body, wings and tail. They worked through all three (21)---- turn, only opting for the design that would lend 21. their final product the maximum flight efficiency. A)in B)on C)off D)with E) from Y 17. A)Therefore B)Otherwise C)In short D)However E)Furthermore S 18. A) had redesigned B) will have redesigned Ö C)have redesigned D)would have redesigned E) could have redesigned 19. A)incorporate B)rehearse C)convert D)threaten E)review 4 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 24. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)about B)for Not all psychologists are primarily interested in early development. But even researchers (22)----to C)over D)towards understand complex adult behaviours often find it useful to examine those behaviours during periods when they E)from are not so complex. For example, humans are capable M of sophisticated communication (23)---- the fact that our languages follow systems of rules. But determining what these rules are has proved very difficult (24)---- researchers. One approach to this problem is to study our language system (25)---- it is being acquired. So, in 25. language development, as well as in many other areas, A)unless B)even though the growing child is a showcase of developing skills and abilities, and researchers interested in different aspects of human development have (26)---- this fact to help C)in case D)while them understand adult behaviour. YE)after 26. 22. A)weakened B)eliminated A)being attempted SC)expanded D)demanded B) to have attempted E)utilized C)to attempt D)attempted E)attempting Ö 23. A)instead of B)except for C)due to D)in spite of E)in contrast with 5 29. When managers place workers under time pressure 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. to perform hazardous tasks, ----. A) employees adhering to the company rules are often 27. ----, which could reduce the number of encouraged through incentives undernourished people by 15%. B) violations of workers' rights cause global protests A) By 2150 food demand could rise by 60% with the Mand instability in the market growing global population C)safety precautions become a lower priority, thereby B) The UN Food and Agriculture Organization says that increasing the chances of injury women are just as good at farming as men D)unintentional injuries are the fourth leading cause of C)Closing the gender gap in farming could increase death in the US yields in developing countries by up to 4% E) the attitudes of both workers and managers are D)Governments do not seem to take considerable steps important in creating a safe workplace to fight starvation in underdeveloped countries Y E) As the global population grows, there is more and more demand to have access to basic food 30. Although the role of diet and nutrition in human evolution has generally come under the scope of anthropology, ----. 28. In order to analyze the light reflected from Earth, ----. A) the subject has also been of great interest to scholars in many other disciplines S A) a team of astronomers used a very large telescope in Chile B) 'nutriture' is the state resulting from the balance between supply of nutrition and the expenditure of the B) some of the light reaches the Moon and is again organism reflected, known as 'Earthshine' C)it is the nutrients that are necessary for all of our bodily functions C)it may be a while before astronomers are able to do that D)it is a fact that modern humans require some 40 to 50 Ö nutrients for proper health D)a number of new planets have been discovered so far with the help of new space telescopes E) diet and nutrition are central to an understanding of the evolutionary journey of humankind E) the light reflected from these distant worlds is too faint to be analyzed by today’s telescopes 6 31. While the study of fossils, called 'paleontology', is a 33. Scientists are still not certain why people need field of biology, ----. sleep, ----. A) fossils have been the key to understanding extinct life A) as it can be extremely difficult for most people to do forms since ancient times their daily activities without sufficient sleep B) its development has been closely linked to efforts to B) yet it influences almost every aspect of our lives, from understand the history of Earth itself Mour mood to the functions of our organs C)there has been an ongoing search for finding even C)though lots of people experience insomnia and they do older fossils since the 1950s not know its causes D)each geological period has its own fossils that are D)so neuroscientists and biologists are investigating characteristic of that particular time ways to improve the quality of sleep E) some scientists find the concept of evolution difficult to E) whereas people who travel long distances generally accept on religious grounds suffer from lack of sleep Y 32. Particularly important to the marketer is knowledge 34. Galaxies come in many shapes and sizes; some are of the philosophies of all major political parties spirals like our own galaxy ----. within a country ----. A) as our sun belongs to a giant galaxy called the 'Milky A) since any of them, when in power, might change the Way' consumption patterns of the public S B) but others are fuzzy balls or shapeless clouds B) as the historical direction each minor party is likely to take is unpredictable C)though our galaxy is unimaginably vast C)no matter how one tends to be more restrictive regarding foreign trade than the others D)if the smallest galaxies have just a few million stars D)so that one party sometimes changes its membership E) so the stars in a galaxy are held together by gravity criteria Ö E) although the doctrines of opposing parties have an influence on the direction of the policy 35. ----, it is not the only incentive that drives people to take certain decisions. A) Whereas most shoppers decline monetary rewards in fear of being ripped off B) As men and women spend more and more time for their appearance C)Although money plays an important part in economic activity D)Unless people are encouraged to save and invest more of their income E) As if it were possible to entice customers with special offers 7 36. In tropical grassland or savanna areas, trees may be 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye found frequently, ----. anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. A) but savanna grasslands are located between humid tropical regions and dry deserts 37. It is noteworthy that the new vision of an ideal world in Leonardo’s art was expressed at a moment when B) whereas temperate or semitropical grassland areas the political situation in Italy was considered as have very little tree growth ho M peless. A) Leonardo’nun sanatındaki yeni ideal dünya C)since hot summers and limited precipitation allow for görüşünün, İtalya’da politik durumun ümitsiz görüldüğü very short growth periods of vegetation bir anda ifade edilmiş olması dikkat çekicidir. D)because temperate grasslands are an important B) Leonardo’nun ifade ettiği yeni ideal dünya görüşünün, resource for plant-eating animals İtalya’nın politik durumunun ümitsiz sanıldığı bir zamanda ortaya konmuş olması dikkate değer E) and therefore vast areas of this type of grassland are bulunmaktadır. not covered by trees C)İtalya’da politik durumdan ümit kesildiğinin Ydüşünüldüğü bir zamanda, Leonardo’nun sanatta yeni ideal dünya görüşünü ortaya koymuş olması çarpıcıdır. D)Leonardo’nun sanatındaki yeni ideal dünya görüşü, İtalya’da politik durumun ümitsiz olduğunun düşünüldüğü bir anda Leonardo tarafından ortaya atılmıştır. E) İtalya’da, politik durumun ümitsiz olduğu bir anda S Leonardo tarafından sanatta yeni ideal dünya görüşünün ortaya atılması hayli dikkat çekmektedir. 38. Violence prevention strategies can work through changing individual behaviour, the environment or the law. Ö A) Şiddeti önleme yöntemleri; bireysel davranışı, çevreyi veya kanunu değiştirerek işe yarayabilir. B) Şiddeti önleme yöntemleri; bireysel davranışın, çevrenin veya kanunun değiştirilmesiyle fayda sağlar. C)Bireysel davranışı, çevreyi veya kanunu değiştirmek, şiddeti önleme yöntemlerine katkıda bulunabilir. D)Bireysel davranışın çevre veya kanun aracılığıyla değiştirilmesi, şiddeti önleme yöntemlerini işe yarar hâle getirebilir. E) Şiddeti önleme yöntemleri, çevre veya kanunun etkisiyle bireysel davranışı değiştirebilir. 8 39. People frequently think of science as a relatively 41. Kendimizi kabul etmek yerine yargıladığımızda modern field; however, in its broadest terms, it is as kendimizin en kötü düşmanı olabiliriz ve bu nedenle old as humankind itself. psikologlar kendimiz hakkında konuşurken nasıl konuştuğumuza dikkat etmemizi tavsiye ederler. A) İnsanlar, genel olarak en geniş anlamıyla insanlığın kendisi kadar eski bir tarihe sahip olan bilimin nispeten A) We can be our worst enemy when we judge rather yeni ortaya çıkmış bir alan olduğunu düşünmektedir. than accept ourselves, and thus psychologists Mrecommend us to care about how we speak when we B) İnsanlar, genel olarak bilimin nispeten yeni bir alan talk about ourselves. olduğunu en geniş anlamıyla düşünse de bilim insanlığın kendisi kadar eskidir. B) We can be our worst enemy unless we judge instead of accepting ourselves, and psychologists encourage C)Genelde en geniş anlamıyla insanlığın kendisi kadar us to be careful about how we talk about ourselves. eski olan bilimin, nispeten yeni bir alan olarak yakın bir zamanda ortaya çıkmış olduğunu düşünen insanlar C)We are at times our worst enemy when we judge bulunmaktadır. rather than accept ourselves for what we are, so psychologists warn us about the way we talk about D)İnsanlar, genelde bilimin nispeten yeni bir alan ourselves. olduğunu düşünür ancak en geniş anlamıyla bilim insanlığın kendisi kadar eskidir. YD)If we judge instead of accepting ourselves as we are, we are the worst enemy of ourselves, and therefore, E) İnsanlar; genel olarak bilimin, modern bir alan psychologists recommend that we should be careful olduğunu düşünmekten ziyade en geniş anlamıyla about how we talk about ourselves. insanlığın kendisi kadar eski olduğuna inanmaktadır. E) Because we judge rather than accept ourselves, we become our worst enemy, so psychologists recommend us to care about how we speak when we talk about ourselves. 40. Birleşik Devletler’dSe 2007 yılında başlayan mali krizden bu yana sağlık kurumları ciddi bütçe kesintilerine uğradı. 42. Can sıkıntısı, esnemeye yol açar ve bu da akciğerleri A) Health institutions have suffered serious budget cuts çevreleyen kasları gererek veya beyne daha fazla since the financial crisis that began in the US in 2007. oksijen taşıyarak uyanık kalmamızı sağlar. B) The financial crisis that began in the US in 2007 has A) When boredom causes us to yawn, the muscles caused health institutions to suffer from serious around the lungs stretch or more oxygen is brought to Öbudget cuts. the brain, which makes us feel awake. C)The reason why health institutions have been suffering B) Yawning, which may be caused by boredom, makes from serious budget cuts is the financial crisis that us feel awake by stretching the muscles surrounding began in the US in 2007. the lungs or bringing more oxygen to the brain. D)Serious budget cuts, which have been experienced by C)Boredom leads to yawning, and this makes us feel health institutions since the financial crisis that began awake by stretching the muscles surrounding the in the US in 2007, cause them to suffer. lungs or bringing more oxygen to the brain. E) Health institutions have been suffering from serious D)Stretching the muscles around the lungs or bringing budget cuts caused by the financial crisis that began more oxygen to the brain, yawning, if caused by in the US in 2007. boredom, makes us feel awake. E) When bored, yawning makes us feel awake by stretching the muscles surrounding the lungs or bringing more oxygen to the brain. 9 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. It is clearly stated in the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A) one's attempt to control feelings of low status might Recently, psychologists Derek Rucker and Adam result in financial loss Galinsky reported that manipulating people's feelings of status either at work or in social life in various ways B) buying bigger food products are considered changes the amount that people will pay for products. unfavourable by those with high status The researchers told individuals to write about a time M they felt either powerful or powerless and then asked C)being aware that your behaviour is under the influence them how much they would be willing to pay for different of feelings of low status, you will pay less for a product products. Subjects who had written about feeling powerless offered to pay more for luxury products such D)if you view yourself as important, you may want the big as a stylish pen or fur coat, yet the desire for a quick fix size for reasons related with high status for feelings of low status may put those who regularly feel as if they lack influence at greater risk of having enormous debt – or at least of making some E) people who feel powerful can pay more for a product questionable investments. Aside from lightening our to show that he or she has feelings of high status wallets, feelings of inferiority can also lead us to gain weight. Marketing professor David Dubois states that Y when people feel unimportant, they are more likely to opt for an extra large coffee or pizza. Consumers make this choice because they want to consume more when 45. It can be understood from the passage that ----. they are feeling low. Accordingly, the researchers conclude that big things may signal higher status, and A) choosing minimal portions bolizes high status as thus powerless people buy more food if it comes in the researchers propose physically larger packages. B) buying things in bigger size relieves the feelings of inferiority S C)those who have high status gain weight more easily than those with low status 43. The research conducted by Rucker and Galinsky D)the association between power and portion size is revealed that ----. rather weak A) those with feelings of low status were not satisfied with their investments E) when people feel low, they hesitate to eat or drink Ö more, thinking that they are powerless B) those who felt powerful gave a high amount of money for luxury products C)manipulating people's feelings of status led them to 46. The passage mainly focuses on the ----. pay reasonable amounts of money for certain products A) reasons why high status is associated with expensive D)there is a connection between the feelings of low goods status and the tendency to pay more B) contradiction between different studies on feelings of E) having felt either powerful or powerless, subjects were low status equally extravagant C)relation between people's status and their investment strategies D)healthy size choices of people to combat feelings of inferiority E) effects of manipulating people's feelings of low status 10 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. It can be understood from the passage that ----. cevaplayınız. A)a combination of factors, including dry climate and In Indonesia, the rainforests are being destroyed due to increasing plantation, contributes to the extinction of the expansion of the palm oil industry. Today, palm oil is rare species both in Malaysia and Indonesia grown on an ever more huge scale, providing global commodity markets with vast quantities of cheap B)the extinction of the orang-utans in Indonesia is more vegetable fat. Across the Indonesian islands of Sumatra Mlikely due to the lack of government effort to protect and Borneo, palm oil plantations have so damaged the them rainforest that experts expect the extinction of the orang-utan in the wild by about 2020, if nothing is done. C)people living in urbanized areas are supposed to More than 90 percent of the orang-utan’s original habitat experience less health problems than those who live in is gone, and the remainder is under serious pressure, remote areas with the palm oil industry being backed by the Indonesian government even in protected areas where D)palm oil industry is trying to find a better way to the last orang-utans live, for example, in southwest produce palm oil to prevent further forest loss Borneo. The forests on these islands are also the home of countless other unique and rare species. Logging E) rare species in the Indonesian forests can survive operations and plantation activities can increase the risk negative conditions caused by palm oil plantation Y of serious fires, especially when coupled with unusually dry conditions. A very large fire may lead to further forest loss and increase pressure on neighbouring virgin forests by improving access to formerly remote areas. They also cause major public health problems across 49. The passage is mainly about the ----. Indonesia and Malaysia, as the haze of smoke drifts across urbanized areas. A) effects of palm oil plantation on the environment across the Indonesian islands S B) expansion and the future of palm oil industry on the Indonesian islands 47. According to the passage, ----. C)reasons why the Indonesian islands are convenient for palm oil plantation A) low costs of palm oil production has increased the size of the industry, but risking the rainforests D)risk of fire due to palm oil plantation and how it can be harmful to both Indonesia and Malaysia ÖB) the expansion of palm oil industry in Indonesia makes the country richer than others in the region E) government efforts in Indonesia to control the palm oil plantation on the islands C)the Indonesian government is trying to stop the palm oil plantation on the islands since it destroys the environment D)the Indonesian government has provided special 50. The author's attitude towards palm oil plantation is areas to protect the orang-utans threatened with ----. extinction A)tolerant B)superficial C)impartial E) Indonesian islands provide global commodity markets with palm oil cheaper than any other place in the world D)disapproving E) favouring 11 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. The International Whaling Commission's ban cevaplayınız. on commercial whaling in 1986 ----. A) has helped decrease dramatically the number of Critics have long argued that Japan's scientific research whales caught whaling was, in fact, commercial hunting. In March, 2014, the United Nation's International Court of Justice agreed, ordering Japan to stop its hunt off Antarctica. B) stopped Japan from hunting whales in the Southern However, the ruling may be only a temporary setback MOcean around Antarctica for Japan. The International Whaling Commission imposed a ban on commercial whaling in 1986, but it C)has made it possible for places, where whales breed, allowed the killing of some whales for scientific to become much safer research. Since then, Japanese whalers have caught 10,710 Antarctic Minke whales in the Southern Ocean D)has led to considerable progress in scientific research around Antarctica, where whales are encouraged to on whale populations breed. Japan claimed the kills were necessary to study recovering populations, but the court said they were E) excluded certain whales from the scope of the ban excessive. Nevertheless, Japan is likely to continue this practice. Japanese officials say they plan to redesign their research program to align with the commission's Y rules. "I would bet that whaling will continue as usual, although with some trivial window dressing to make it look like they are complying with the ruling," says whale 53. Following the promise to redesign their research researcher Phillip Clapham. If Japan, the only nation program, Japanese officials ----. using the inconsistency in the regulations, submits an acceptable proposal to the commission, the country A) will minimize the use of conventional methods of could resume the practice as soon as possible. hunting Minke whales B) may continue to hunt whales commercially in disguise S C)can gain substantial support from international organizations for their whaling policies 51. According to the passage, the decision made by the D)will comply with the rules set by the International International Court of Justice ----. Whaling Commission A) seems to satisfy whale researcher Phillip Clapham's concerns E) could protect recovering whale populations against Ö commercial hunting B) may lead Japan to hunt whales in places other than Antarctica C)will not be effective in the long-term 54. What could be the best title for the passage? D)contradicts the ban imposed by the International A) International Competition for Hunting Whales Whaling Commission B) UN's Efforts to Deter Japan from Hunting Whales E) has caused great controversy among critics C)Unacceptable Whale Hunting by Japan D)Protection of Endangered Whale Species E) Japan's Contribution to Research on Whales 12 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. According to the passage, lacto-vegetarians ----. cevaplayınız. A) would rather drink milk than eat eggs A vegetarian is a person who eats no flesh. There are subcategories, such as lacto-vegetarians and B) view making animal products equal to mistreatment of ova-vegetarians, who eat no flesh but who eat some of animals the products of animals – in these cases, milk and eggs respectively. A vegan, on the other hand, not only M C)refuse to purchase products containing milk refuses flesh, but also abstains from eating and sometimes wearing all animal products. Vegans argue that animal products cannot be separated from animal D)do not wear or use any animal products mistreatment. They point, for instance, to the connections between eating eggs and the keeping of E) eat flesh of certain animals in some cases hens in battery cages, and between drinking milk and the breeding and slaughter of veal calves, which are necessary to keep dairy cows in milk. For the same reason, many vegans also refuse to wear or use products based on animal material such as soap, wool and leather. They make the point that it would be 57. It is understood from the passage that vegans ----. Y considered by a vegetarian unsuitable to be entertained on a leather seat. Other variations are A) are in strong opposition to the consumption of animal vegetarians who will eat free-range eggs but refuse milk, products and others who will eat fish but refuse the flesh of other animals. In spite of problems of definition, there have B) are the only kind of vegetarians who find it difficult to been several attempts to calculate the extent of eat flesh vegetarianism in a number of countries, but the data available for countries such as the United Kingdom and C)are much healthier than lacto-vegetarians and the United States are few. ova-vegetarians S D)have made great progress in controlling animal mistreatment E) can use certain animal products such as soap and leather 55. According to the information at the end of the passage, which of the following questions can easily be answered? Ö A) What do we mean by vegetarianism in broad terms? 58. It can be inferred from the passage that ----. B) Why do people become vegetarian? A) different types of vegetarians have different approaches towards the concept of vegetarianism C)Why is it difficult to calculate the extent of vegetarianism? B) animal mistreatment, especially of hens and calves, is a crucial issue discussed by all vegetarians D)Is there an increase in the number of vegetarians across the world? C)fish is preferred as an alternative by all vegetarians when they refuse to eat any other animal flesh E) Which countries have the highest proportions of vegetarians? D)vegetarianism no longer draws attention in many countries such as the United States E) all vegetarians hardly eat any animal products except for egg, whether free-range or not 13 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. It is clearly stated in the passage that pharaohs ----. cevaplayınız. A) had to choose between being a political and religious Egypt's Old Kingdom flourished on the flood-enriched leader banks of the River Nile. It was an era of prosperity, relative stability, and strong centralized rule. During this B) were believed to be the representatives of heavenly period, the pyramids were built and Egyptian society gods worshipped their mighty kings, or pharaohs, as 'gods on M Earth'. Old Kingdom society was tightly controlled by C)were thought to come from another world to rule their the powerful pharaoh. Central to life, politics, and kingdom religion, which were all closely combined, was the idea that the pharaoh was a semi-divine figure who acted as mediator between the gods and his people. The D)were far from making use of the fertile Nile valley pharaoh not only oversaw elaborate religious rituals but also headed a vast, highly organized political and E) held their religious ceremonies along the banks of the administrative bureaucracy. Pharaohs were believed to River Nile be earthly representations of the gods and were the upholdersof a justice system that aimed to reflect the cosmic order. A pharaoh was also the figure who Y worked with the gods to ensure that the Nile brought silt-rich annual floods each year, maintaining the Nile 61. The underlined word 'upholders' in the passage is valley fertile enough to support the country. Though closest in meaning to ----. Egyptians did seem to realize he was a flesh-and-blood human, they stood in awe of the sacred power of the A)admirers B)speakers C)keepers pharaoh. D)finders E) punishers S 59. According to the passage, Egypt's Old Kingdom ----. 62. What can be inferred from the passage about Egypt's Old Kingdom? A) was a wealthy state with centralized governance headed by pharaohs A) Stability was achieved through democratic rule despite the relative lack of prosperity. B) deemed that prosperity and strong centralization were Ömore important than stability B) Stability was negatively affected by the highly powerful position of the pharaohs. C)fell long before the era when the pyramids were built C)It was difficult for the rulers to combine social, religious D)ruled during a period when people were free to and political aspects of life in the Old Kingdom. worship their own gods D)The figure of pharoah was central in designing every E) effectively separated religious affairs from political aspect of life. ones E) To the pharaohs, religion was less significant than prosperity and centralization in the Old Kingdom. 14 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Hüseyin: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  What do you think about going to Russia for the bulunuz. summer holiday? 63. Murat: Gülsüm:  Why is it easier to speak using gestures?  I've always wanted to visit St. Petersburg. It's a beautiful city that has inspired artists, writers, Taylan: cMomposers and thinkers for hundreds of years.  Well, speaking without gesturing requires more thought. Hüseyin:  ---- Murat:  ---- Gülsüm:  Yes, it's everything a culture lover could dream of. Taylan: We could also visit dozens of palaces and over  Exactly. For instance, pointing to keys on the table 200 museums. Please, let's go there. and saying “The keys are there.” is much faster and simpler than saying, “Your keys are right A) From May through the end of July, they have a behind you on the table, next to the book.” celebration featuring opera, classical music, and of Y course, the ballet. A) Do you mean a lot more words are needed to convey your message? B) I don't know. I was actually planning to go on a camping holiday. Being in the countryside is what B) So we need to read more on the neurological link excites me. You know, mountains, lakes, forests and between speech and gesture. plenty of fresh air. C)The Trans-Siberian Railway is the longest railway in C)But some people still insist on verbalising their the world, and we can take it all the way from Moscow thoughts even if they use body language. Sin the west, to the seaport of Vladivostok in the east. D)Do you think gesturing should be used only when one D)Russia makes me think of deep snow and frigid is short of words? temperatures, but in the summer we could enjoy the natural beauty of the countryside and the warm E) I believe one needs to think in depth before he or she sunshine. speaks. E) Russia spans eleven different time zones, so you can easily see how big the country actually is and it has Ö such a diverse mixture of different cultures. 15 65. Cansu: 66. Harun:  In the article I’ve been reading, it says we’re closer – Have you ever heard about the companies that use to either our mother or our father. Which is true 'multisensory' marketing? for you? Gizem: Erkan: – ----  ---- HaMrun: Cansu: – Not exactly. They want to have not only the right  What do you mean by that? look for their products but also the right sounds, smell, taste, and touch. Erkan:  Well, until I was 18, I was closer to my mother, but Gizem: as I got older, I felt more empathy with my father. – Now, I see your point. Coffee shops are a good example, right? They have a particular style of A) Well, the generation gap is a key factor that illustrates music that they play in their stores as well as it best. certain aromas and flavours. B) As I’m getting older and older, my expectations from A) Companies using multisensory marketing! Are they Y both of them change. the ones that sell multifunctional products? C)I think it depends on what stage a person is at in his or B) It's a complex issue which I only partially understand. I her life. haven't read enough about it. D)Both mother and father have the same responsibilities C)Well, I visited one last week and it was really amazing. while raising their children. What do you know about them? E) I don’t think childSren usually make a preference D)Really? I haven't heard about them yet. Can you between their mother and father. explain what you mean? E) Of course. One of my friends has started up such a company. Ö 16 67. Gülşen: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en – Do you think living in an extended family makes yakın cümleyi bulunuz. children more sociable and self-confident? 68. Experts admit that the Hagia Sophia has survived Orhan: earthquakes due to the supports built by the Great – It may make them more sociable but I don’t think it Architect Sinan. makes them more self-confident but rather more dependent. MAccording to experts, it was because of the Great A) Architect Sinan's supports that the Hagia Sophia has Gülşen: been able to survive different natural disasters – ---- especially earthquakes. B)If the Great Architect Sinan had not built the supports, Orhan: it would have been impossible for the Hagia Sophia to – Definitely! They might not be able to find someone survive earthquakes, as experts acknowledge. to back them up all the time. They have to make their own decisions. C)The experts argue the fact that the Hagia Sophia would have collapsed as a result of earthquakes if the A) Is it really true that being social depends on the Great Architect Sinan had not built the supports. number of the family members? Y B) It's always easy for these children to make friends, D)The experts believe that the supports built by the Great Architect Sinan are the main reason why the isn't it? Hagia Sophia did not collapse during the time of earthquakes. C)Do you believe that children brought up in extended families also have high self-esteem? E) According to experts, thanks to the Great Architect Sinan’s supports that were built onto the Hagia D)Aren't there any positive results of growing up in an Sophia, no damage was caused even by earthquakes. extended family?S E) Do you mean that children in nuclear families are more independent? Ö 17 69. Although we now accept drawings as works of art in 71. The most fuel-efficient way to transport people and their own right, up until recently they were thought goods is by sea, but journey times are long. to be preparatory processes – no matter how intricate or complex they might be. A) Sea transportation is widely preferred to carry goods from one place to another although it is both A)As part of the preparatory process in the production of time-consuming and expensive. a work of art, drawings were considered by some to be works of art; however, today, this is no longer the case B) M Transportation by sea is the most efficient way for unless they are detailed and complex. people and goods as it costs less than the other means of transportation. B) Drawings have always been considered to be rightful C)People and goods are best transported by sea in works of art, but only when they were very intricate terms of fuel consumption; however, it is and complex, were they used in preparation for other time-consuming. works of art. D)Other means of transportation can take less time and C)Today, drawings are considered to be art; however, cost less, as they are much more efficient than sea not so long ago, this was not the case even though transportation. they could be both detailed and complicated; they were only regarded as a preliminary stageY of a work of E) Transporting people and goods by sea is mostly art. preferred, as it is the fastest and cheapest way of D)The preparatory process of a work of art generally transportation. includes an intricate or complex drawing, which was the usual process in the past, yet this is no longer true. E) Even though people regard drawings as true works of art, it was not until quite recently that people appreciated their role in the preparatory process of a complex, detailed work of art. S 70. The growth of the European Union has weakened the nation states’ authority though it is still nation states that take policy decisions and implement European Union policies. Ö A) In spite of the fact that the authority of the nation states has been weakened by the growth of the European Union, they continue taking policy decisions and carrying out European Union policies. B) Even if the authority of the nation states has been eliminated by the growth of the European Union, nation states are responsible for taking policy decisions and carrying out European Union policies. C)Nation states in the European Union have been affected by its growth although they still hold the authority to take policy decisions and implement European Union policies. D)The expansion of the European Union has devastated its authority on the nation states to take policy decisions and carry out European Union policies. E) The authority of nation states has been weakened by the growth of the European Union, which still takes policy decisions and implement the European Union policies. 18 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada 73. Nowadays, manual labour has largely been replaced anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek by machines; in some cases machines are cümleyi bulunuz. completely taking over certain processes. For example, some machines produce food and energy, 72. The most fundamental aspect of Piaget's theory is as well as transport passengers and goods by land, the belief that intelligence is a process, not sea, air and even space. ---- The global connection something that a child has, but something that a between humans and machines is made possible by child does. Piaget's child does not possess coMmputer networks that allow for the merging of old knowledge, but understands the world by acting or and new ways of communication. Computers can operating in it. ---- These actions represent the even be programmed to simulate the intelligent cognitive structures of infancy and are called performances of living organisms and transfer this 'schemes'. artificial intelligence into motion carried out by robots. A) Furthermore, as a student of biology and zoology, Piaget learned that survival requires adaptation. A) Machines are used to accomplish almost all agricultural tasks from cultivating the soil to sowing B) One psychologist might concentrate on infants, like and harvesting. Piaget, while another might study the ways in which children's social skills affect their success. B) An increasing number of machines are equipped with Y sophisticated artificial intelligence and can be C)For example, Piaget would describe an infant's programmed to handle many types of work. knowledge of a ball in terms of what he or she performs with it – pushing, throwing or mouthing it. C)There is, however, growing concern about the potential threat of machines becoming more intelligent D)For Piaget, development referred to continual than humans. recognition of knowledge into new and more complex structures. D)Others simplify administration, planning or organizational tasks; for instance, computers support S E) The cognitive-developmental approach actually office work, education and research. includes several related theories, and it is closely associated with the work of Piaget. E) This is reducing the number of jobs that are available for unskilled workers in these sectors. Ö 19 74. ---- It was all very well to have a steam engine next 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla to a factory to turn the generator, to turn the motors, okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan and light the bulbs. But the energy lost along the cümleyi bulunuz. wires was so great that it would require a steam 76. (I) What conservationists do in order to protect engine and generator at the end of every street to endangered species should be supported by service a town. Indeed, early distribution networks governments to succeed. (II) Conservationists are using had a limited range of about 2km. The challenge was different methods to decide which species to save and to come up with a system that could offer useful M not to save. (III)Each one favours certain priorities, such electricity at the end of a very long wire. as an animal’s role in preserving a food chain or genetic diversity. (IV)Serving those priorities ultimately deems A) Walking at night, in the past, meant walking through a species winners or losers. (V)For example, Chinese world illuminated via the burning of coal. river dolphins are viewed as losers since they serve no meaningful role, while gray wolves are winners because B) Reliable electric lighting transformed cities in Europe of controlling animal population. and America, making streets safer and helping to foster a 24-hour society. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V C)By the end of the 19th century, electricity offered huge potential to change the world, but it suffeYred from one major limitation: distribution. D)The name electricity was coined by William Gilbert, 77. (I) During the 1980s, evidence began to emerge who had spent years studying magnetism. suggesting that people who receive social support from friends, family members, and health care providers E) While the major source of electricity was water and tended to live longer and healthier lives than people who coal in the past, today it is nuclear radiation. lacked support. (II) A review done by a group of scientists concluded that people who have high levels of Ssocial support are more able than other people to cope with stress and chronic pain. (III) Although social support has been widely researched, no single definition of the 75. 'Genre' is a term that refers to a type of media concept has emerged. (IV) Indeed, lack of social support rivalled other well-established risk factors as a risk for product or work of art governed by implicit rules that are shared by the makers of the product and the poor health. (V)Cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, and inactive lifestyle are among the impacts audience for it. Examples are thrillers, soap operas with which social support is compared. and talk shows. ---- To some extent, these rules are about the content of the genre. Particular types of A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Ö characters and events, for example, will routinely occur in particular genres and others will not. A) Every genre has its own standards and conventions that distinguish it from others. B) Today, there are many people involved in the 78. (I) Nearly half of all college math majors are women, and production of the film rating system. females now score as well as males on standardized math tests. (II) Yet, only about 30 percent of Ph.D.s in mathematics – and fewer in computer science, physics C)Some agencies control whether the content of these and engineering – are awarded to women every year. types of media are suitable to be broadcast. (III)Researchers have long blamed sex discrimination and bias, but research suggests that there may now be D)Moreover, you can also come across similar a less sinister culprit: motherhood. (IV) Family definitions in music. responsibilities can explain why men outnumber women in science- and math-related positions. E) On the other hand, there are various reasons why (V)Undeniably, women in science have had to fight sex genre is more controlled in certain countries. discrimination for decades. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 20 79. (I) In Britain, biscuit consumption is higher than in the rest of Europe. (II) When someone sits down for a tea, coffee or biscuit, he or she might be consuming a little bit of celebrity history. (III) Some of the most common and popular foods and beverages are named after famous people of the past. (IV) Earl Grey tea, Garibaldi biscuits and the classic Victoria sponge cake are among the most favoured food and drinks linked with historical M figures. (V) Rich, famous and talented historical celebrities have also lent their names to seafood dishes, puddings and champagne. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 80. (I) Staring at the Sun without sunglasses huYrts, which is reason enough to avoid doing it. (II) Too little sunshine leads to low vitamin D levels, which put you at higher risk of certain cancers. (III) But direct exposure to the ultraviolet radiation in intense sunlight can also damage the eye and increase the likelihood of a cataract developing. (IV) Cataracts affect the part of the eye that focuses light – the lens – gradually clouding vision and leading to blindness. (V) Surgery to restore vision involves making tiny cuts in the eye to remove the S cataract and replace the lens. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Ö TEST BİTTİ. 21 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. SINAVDA UYULACAK KURALLAR 1. Sınav salonunda saate entegre kamera ile kayıt yapılıyor ise; kamera kayıtlarının incelenmesinden sonra sınav kurallarına uymadığı tespit edilen adayların sınavları Yönetim Kurulunca geçersiz sayılacaktır. 2. Cep telefonu ile sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Her türlü elektronik/mekanik cihazla ve çağrı cihazı, telsiz, fotoğraf makinesi vb. araçlarla; cep bilgisayarı, her türlü saat ile, kablosuz iletişim sağlayan bluetooth, kulaklık vb. her türlü bilgisayar özelliği bulunan cihazlarla; her türlü kesici ve delici alet, ateşli silah vb. teçhizatla; kalem, silgi, kalemtıraş, müsvedde kâğıdı, defter, kitap, ders notu, sözlük, dergi, gazete vb. yayınlar, hesap makinesi, pergel, açıölçer, cetvel vb. araçlarla sınava girmek kesinlikle yasaktır. Sınava kolye, küpe, yüzük (alyans hariç), bilezik, broş, anahtar, anahtarlık, metal para gibi metal içerikli eşyalarla (basiMt başörtü iğnesi ve ince metal tokalı kemer hariç); plastik veya camdan yapılmış her türlü güneş gözlüğü ile (şeffaf/numaralı gözlük hariç), banka/kredi kartı ulaşım kartı vb. kartlarla; yiyecek, içecek (şeffaf pet şişe içerisindeki su hariç) ve diğer tüketim maddeleri ile gelmeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. Bu araçlarla sınava girmiş adayların adı mutlaka Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak, bu adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacaktır. Ancak, Başkanlığı tarafından belirlenen Engelli ve Yedek Sınav Evrakı Yönetim Merkezi (Y ) bina- larında sınava girecek olan engelli adayların sınava giriş belgelerinde yazılı olan araç gereçler, cihazlar vb. yukarıda belirtilen yasakların kapsamı dışında değerlendirilecektir. 3. Bu sınav için verilen toplam cevaplama süresi 150 dakikadır. Sınav başladıktan sonra ilk 110 ve son 15 dakika içinde adayın sınavdan çıkmasına kesinlikle izin verilmeyecektir. Bu süreler dışında, cevaplamayı sınav bitmeden ta- mamlarsanız cevap kâğıdınızı ve soru kitYapçığınızı salon görevlilerine teslim ederek salonu terk edebilirsiniz. Bildirilen sürelere aykırı davranışlardan adayın kendisi sorumludur. 4. Sınav salonundan ayrılan aday, her ne sebeple olursa olsun, tekrar sınava alınmayacaktır. 5. Sınav süresince görevlilerle konuşmak, görevlilere soru sormak yasaktır. Aynı şekilde görevlilerin de adaylarla ya- kından ve alçak sesle konuşmaları ayrıca adayların birbirinden kalem, silgi vb. şeyleri istemeleri kesinlikle yasaktır. 6. Sınav sırasında, görevlilerin her türlü uyarısına uymak zorundasınız. Sınavınızın geçerli sayılması, her şeyden önce, sınav kurallarına uymanıza bağlıdır. Kurallara aykırı davranışta bulunanların ve yapılacak uyarılara uymayanların kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. S 7. Sınav sırasında kopya çeken, çekmeye kalkışan, kopya veren, kopya çekilmesine yardım edenlerin kimlik bilgileri Salon Sınav Tutanağına yazılacak ve bu adayların sınavları geçersiz sayılacaktır. Adayların test sorularına verdikleri cevapların dağılımları bilgi işlem yöntemleriyle incelenecek, bu incelemelerden elde edilen bulgular bireysel veya toplu olarak kopya çekildiğini gösterirse kopya eylemine katılan adayın/adayların sınavı geçersiz sayılacak ayrıca 2 yıl boyunca tarafından düzenlenen tüm sınavlara başvurusu yasaklanabilecektir. Sınav görevlileri bir salondaki sınavın, kurallara uygun biçimde yapılmadığını, toplu kopya girişiminde bulunulduğu- nu raporlarında bildirdiği takdirde, bu salonda sınava giren tüm adayların sınavını geçersiz sayabilir. 8. Cevap kâğıdında doldurmanız gereken alanlar bulunmaktadır. Bu alanları doldurunuz. Cevap kâğıdınızı başkaları Ö tarafından görülmeyecek şekilde tutmanız gerekmektedir. Cevap kâğıdına yazılacak her türlü yazıda ve yapılacak bütün işaretlemelerde kurşun kalem kullanılacaktır. Sınav süresi bittiğinde cevapların cevap kâğıdına işaretlenmiş olması gerekir. Soru kitapçığına işaretlenen cevaplar geçerli değildir. 9. Soru kitapçığınızı alır almaz kapağında bulunan alanları doldurunuz. Size söylendiği zaman sayfaların eksik olup olmadığını, kitapçıkta basım hatalarının bulunup bulunmadığını ve soru kitapçığının her sayfasında basılı bulunan soru kitapçık numarasının, kitapçığın ön kapağında basılı soru kitapçık numarasıyla aynı olup olmadığını kontrol ediniz. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfası eksik veya basımı hatalıysa değiştirilmesi için salon başkanına başvurunuz. Size verilen soru kitapçığının numarasını cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru Kitapçık Numarası” alanına yazınız ve kodlayınız. Cevap kâğıdınızdaki “Soru kitapçık numaramı doğru kodladım.” kutucuğunu işaretleyiniz. Soru kitapçığı üzerinde yer alan Soru Kitapçık Numarasını doğru kodladığınızı beyan eden alanı imzalayınız. 10. Sınav sonunda soru kitapçıkları toplanacak ve ’de incelenecektir. Soru kitapçığınızın sayfalarını koparmayı- nız. Soru kitapçığının bir sayfası bile eksik çıkarsa sınavınız geçersiz sayılacaktır. 11. Cevap kâğıdına ve soru kitapçığına yazılması ve işaretlenmesi gereken bilgilerde bir eksiklik ve/veya yanlışlık olma- sı hâlinde sınavınızın değerlendirilmesi mümkün değildir, bu husustaki özen yükümlülüğü ve sorumluluk size aittir. 12. Soru kitapçığının sayfalarındaki boş yerleri müsvedde için kullanabilirsiniz. 13. Soruları ve/veya bu sorulara verdiğiniz cevapları ayrı bir kâğıda yazıp bu kâğıdı dışarı çıkarmanız kesinlikle yasaktır. 14. Sınav salonundan ayrılmadan önce, soru kitapçığınızı, cevap kâğıdınızı ve sınava giriş belgenizi salon görevli- lerine eksiksiz olarak teslim etmeyi unutmayınız. 15. Sınav süresi salon görevlilerinin “SINAV BAŞLAMIŞTIR” ibaresiyle başlar, “SINAV BİTMİŞTİR” ibaresiyle sona erer. Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve doğacak tüm mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. O 001 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ (13 EYLÜL 2015) İNGİLİZCE M 1. C 21. A 41. A 61. C 2. E 22. E 42. C 62. D 3. C 23. C 43. D 63. A 4. A 24. B 44. A 64. A Y 5. A 25. D 45. B 65. C 6. B 26. E 46. E 66. A 7. B 27. C 47. A 67. E S 8. C 28. A 48. B 68. B 9. B 29. C 49. A 69. C 10. A 30. A 50. D 70. A Ö11. B 31. B 51. C 71. C 12. C 32. A 52. E 72. C 13. D 33. B 53. B 73. D 14. E 34. B 54. C 74. C 15. A 35. C 55. C 75. A 16. D 36. B 56. A 76. A 17. A 37. A 57. A 77. C 18. C 38. A 58. A 78. E 19. A 39. D 59. A 79. A 20. D 40. A 60. B 80. B T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (İlkbahar Dönemi) 27 MART 2016 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S Ö İNGİLİZCE TESTİ Bu tes(cid:129)e 80 soru vardır. 5. Despite its problems, the Space Shuttle has been a 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. major step forward in spaceflight, ---- more than one M hundred successful missions and pointing the way for future reusable spacecraft. 1. As we learn more about the neural mechanisms of intelligence, ---- for enhancing intelligence become A)standing for B)carrying out more likely. C)running into D)calling for A)precautions B)substitutions E)putting aside C)necessities D)prospects E)permissions Y 6. From the beginning of human history, innovators have experimented with all kinds of elements, from the ordinary to the invisible, trying to ---- new, 2. From the early 1800s scientists began to gather ---- improved materials. amounts of data about marine life, paving the way for future knowledge about the importance of the A)come up with B)do away with planet's oceans. C)cut down on D)get along with A)immense B)predictable S E)make up for C)equivalent D)relevant E)sustainable Ö3. Reduction in cholesterol, body fat and oxidation is believed to help slow the ageing process ----. A)doubtfully B)reflectively C)externally D)obscurely E)considerably 4. Trade between people depends on a uniform set of weights and measures that can be used by both sides of the transaction to ---- that the amount obtained or handed over is correct. A)disapprove B)pretend C)ensure D) realise E)estimate 1 10. In 1971, construction began on a vast hydroelectric 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. project to dam the rivers that flow ---- James Bay and Hudson Bay, generating electricity ---- use in Canada and the US. 7. With the development of agriculture, humans ---- to transform more and more extensively the A)through / in B)by / with environments in which they ----. C)Malong / about D)at / on A) had begun / had been living E)into / for B) are beginning / were living C)began / lived D)have begun / were going to live 11. By the middle of the 19th century, the growing acceptance that microbes can kill us had once more E) would begin / have been living focused people’s attention ---- a world only visible ---- a microscope. Y A)on / through B)to / upon 8. Any student who ---- four years in high school or C)by / over D)against / in college attempting to learn a second language ---- the struggle of trying to memorize vocabulary, verb E)of / for conjugation or tenses. A) was spending / had to appreciate S B) spends / has to appreciate 12. Astronomers discover thousands of new members of the solar system every month, most of which, ----, C)had spent / should have appreciated are insignificant bodies like small asteroids or comets. D)has spent / can appreciate A)however B)therefore E) is spending / used to appreciate C)otherwise D)accordingly Ö E)in other words 9. For many consumers from all over the world, the Internet is the first place ---- for useful information that ---- them about what they buy. 13. ---- sustainable technologies usually cost a lot of A) to look / will inform money to set up, they save money in the long run. B) looking / has informed A)Even if B)After C)to have looked / informs C)Just as D)Unless D)to be looking / is informing E)Once E) having looked / will have informed 2 14. With normal ocean waves, only the surface of the water body is in motion; a tsunami, ----, brings not only the surface into motion but lifts and then drops an entire water column in the ocean. A)namely B)though C)for example D)similarly M E)hence 15. The basic principles of good diets are ---- simple ---- one can summarize them in just ten words: eat less, move more, eat lots of fruits and vegetables. A)neither / nor B)the more / the less Y C)whether / or D)such / as E)so / that 16. The henna, which Smay have spiritual significance in various cultures, is applied ---- different graphic rules, with different bolic relations. A)due to B)except for C)unlike D)according to E)prior to Ö 3 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 20. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)provision B)consumption A genetically modified plant may produce specific C)management D)distribution proteins or other substances that have never before been a part of the human food supply. These substances have potentially negative side effects; for E)counterpart instance, they (17)---- as toxins or allergens. Accordingly, M an extensive testing and approval process is mandated for foods of this kind, including individual ingredients and additives (18)---- whole foods. Approval is granted (19)---- the food is shown to be safe in accordance with 21. scientific standards. This is accomplished by comparing the genetically modified product with its traditional A)beyond B)against C)on (20)----. The long-term effects of the use of genetically modified plants (21)---- people and the environment have D)with E) for not yet been adequately determined. Y 17. A)may act B)could have acted C)were to act D)will have acted S E)must act 18. A)in terms of B)regarding Ö C)thanks to D)despite E)as well as 19. A)though B)only if C)unless D)as if E)in case 4 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 25. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)Being started B)To start Thousands of years ago, agriculture began as a highly C)Having been started D)Starting site-specific activity. The first farmers were gardeners who grew individual plants, and they (22)---- the microclimates and patches of soil that favoured those E)To have started plants. But as farmers acquired scientific knowledge and M mechanical expertise, they enlarged their plots using standardized approaches (23)---- ploughing the soil and spreading animal manure as fertilizer to increase crop production. (24)---- the years, they developed better 26. methods of preparing the soil and protecting plants from insects, and eventually, machines to reduce the labor A)Given that B)Even though required. (25)---- in the 19th century, scientists invented chemical pesticides and used newly discovered genetic C)Just as D)In case principles to select for more productive plants. (26)---- these methods maximized overall productivity, they E)Because caused some areas within fields to underperform. Y 22. A)brought in B)paid for C)looked for S D)kept on E) took away 23. A)on behalf of B)in the light of Ö C)on account of D)in contrast with E)such as 24. A)Over B)For C)In D)From E) Off 5 30. ---- he is well known to future generations mostly 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. because of his treasure-filled tomb, which was discovered intact in 1922. 27. We will soon have to find new ways of living that do A) After King Tutankhamun's body was mummified and not harm the environment ----. placed in a series of coffins A) because researchers aim to make waste products less B) Although the grave goods accompanying King M damaging to the environment Tutankhamun to the afterlife tell much about daily life then B) when humans waste an enormous amount of the Earth's resources C)While King Tutankhamun had little opportunity to achieve greatness in his short life of 18 years C)if we continue using the Earth's resources at current rate D)Because King Tutankhamun died from a fracture in his left leg that became infected with gangrene D)while the habitats of some species have been largely destroyed by humans E) When King Tutankhamun was still a child and under the influence of advisers E) although environmental organizations are trying to Y conserve the wildlife 31. NASA's Kepler space telescope was launched in 2009 and stopped gathering data in 2013 after a 28. Many vitamins and minerals are necessary mechanical failure ----. components of our diet ----. A) whereas no input has been detected from it since it A) unless they are consumed excessively Sbroke down B) although they are basic fuels of life B) because during its construction the engineers worked meticulously to maximize its lifespan C)but lack of vitamin E can cause skin diseases C)so it searched for planets by measuring the levels in a D)while moderate levels will be beneficial star's brightness E) even if they help us stay healthy D)yet in its relatively short lifetime it has provided a wealth of discovery Ö E) since it has discovered a group of stars where each star has planets of its own 29. Cosmetics companies have started to remove parabens and other harmful chemicals from their products ----. A) even though there is not much pressure from regulatory bodies to do so B) when they experience no adverse effects on humans C)even if a link between parabens and breast cancer exists D)because most underarm deodorants do not contain parabens E) although there is a long-running debate about the safety of parabens 6 32. Whereas the aeroplanes of the future were expected 34. ---- since scholars and researchers have an to cross oceans and continents as fast as possible unrivalled understanding of potential drug targets in in the 1980s ----. the development procedures of new medicines. A) we now focus on noise reduction, lighter and stronger A) There is an increasing recognition from scientists that materials, and lower fuel consumption they need to work closely with companies that provide complementary expertise B) the race to develop new aircraft technologies is at M least as intense now as it was 30 years ago B) The reason for the failure of alternative drugs in the market is their limited efficacy for their targets rather C)the first heavier-than-air machines to fly were kites, than purely safety invented by the Chinese in about 1000 BC C)It is sometimes ignored by authorities that brilliant D)the needs of aircraft travellers are very well-matched experts need to be chosen earlier in the development with the technological development of airlines process by the companies E) designers have improved the conditions of both the D)Academic institutions are falling short of engaging with terminals and the neighbourhoods of airports all over leading drug companies at an earlier stage of a the world pharmaceutical development Y E) Pharmaceutical companies are increasingly turning to collaboration with the academicians at the top ranking universities 33. To cope with the increasing number of tourists visiting Saudi Arabia ----. A) investment in the tourism sector is not among the top priorities of the government 35. ---- so as to maximise the amount of accurate S information in hand. B) hotel managers say that the average stay for a tourist is between two and seven days A) The police often have the option of closing an investigation file C)the government has outlined a plan to invest more money in its airports and transportation B) It is highly crucial for the police to interview eyewitnesses D)officials have been concerned about the potential oversupply of hotels in the country C)It would be easy to identify someone with the help of closed-circuit television ÖE) the country's four main international airports handle most of the domestic air travel D)One must realise how important it is to avoid identifying an innocent person as the criminal E) The cognitive interview has proved itself to be more effective than other interview techniques 7 36. Although the story of humankind and the peopling 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngillizce cümleye of the planet still holds many mysteries ----. anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. A) receding oceans are likely to expose ancient land bridges between continents 37. The notion of an algorithm, a procedure for arriving at a solution by a sequence of elementary steps, B) the most widely accepted theory states that modern was also familiar to the ancient Greeks, as can be humans came out of Africa seen in Euclid's algorithm used even today. M C)efforts to trace the diversification of animal forms by A) Bir dizi temel adımla bir çözüme ulaşma prosedürü analyzing the change in DNA are premature olan algoritma kavramı, Öklid'in bugün bile kullanılan algoritmasında da görülebileceği üzere antik D)one of the earliest pieces of art found in Europe can Yunanlılar tarafından da bilinmekteydi. be dated to 24,000 BC B) Algoritma kavramı, yani bir dizi temel adımla bir E) no one knows where exactly the first agricultural çözüme ulaşma prosedürü, Öklid'in bugün bile villages appeared kullanılan algoritmasında da görülebileceği gibi antik Yunanlılar döneminde de bilinmekteydi. C)Bir temel adımlar zinciri ile bir çözüme ulaşma Y prosedürü olan algoritma kavramı, Öklid'in algoritmasında da görülebileceği üzere bugün olduğu gibi antik Yunanlılar zamanında da biliniyordu. D)Bir temel adımlar dizisiyle bir çözüme ulaşma prosedürü olan ve antik Yunanlılar tarafından da bilinen algoritma kavramı, Öklid'in bugün bile kullanılan algoritmasında görülebilir. SE) Öklid'in bugün bile kullanılan algoritmasında da görülebileceği üzere antik Yunanlılar tarafından da bilinen algoritma kavramı, bir dizi temel adımla bir çözüme ulaşma prosedürüdür. 38. Reptiles and insects have no need to sweat Ö because, unlike mammals, they do not need to maintain a constant body temperature. A) Memelilerin sabit bir vücut ısısını korumak için terlemeye ihtiyaçları vardır fakat sürüngenler ve böcekler için aynı durum söz konusu değildir. B) Sürüngenler ve böcekler terlemeye ihtiyaç duymaz çünkü memelilerin aksine sabit bir vücut ısısını korumaları gerekmez. C)Memelilerin sabit bir vücut ısısını korumak için terlemeleri gerekmektedir ancak sürüngenlerin ve böceklerin buna ihtiyacı yoktur. D)Sürüngenler ve böcekler, sabit bir vücut ısısını korumaları gerekmediği için, memeliler gibi terlemeye ihtiyaç duymazlar. E) Sürüngenlerin ve böceklerin terlemeye ihtiyaçları yoktur çünkü memelilerde olduğu gibi sabit bir vücut ısısını korumaları gerekmez. 8 39. It is true that power nourishes all relationships, 41. İngiliz posta sisteminin 1510 yılındaki kuruluşundan but only equally shared power can create happy beri en büyük ve yegane yeniliği olan dünyanın ilk individuals and satisfying marriages. yapışkanlı posta pulu Penny Black, 1840 yılında basıldı. A) Bütün ilişkileri besleyen şeyin güç olduğu doğrudur, A) In 1840, the world's first adhesive postage stamp, the ancak mutlu bireyler ve tatminkâr evlilikler, güç Penny Black, was issued, and it is the greatest single sadece eşit olarak paylaşılırsa yaratılabilir. Mreform of the English postal system since its establishment in 1510. B) Bütün ilişkilerin güçle beslendiği doğrudur, ancak güç sadece eşit olarak paylaşıldığında mutlu bireyler ve B) In 1840, the English postal system issued the world's tatminkâr evlilikler yaratabilir. first adhesive postage stamp, the Penny Black, which is the greatest single reform since its establishment in C)Gücün bütün ilişkileri beslediği doğrudur, ancak güç 1510. sadece eşit olarak paylaşıldığı takdirde mutlu bireyler ve tatminkâr evlilikler yaratabilir. C)The Penny Black, which was issued in 1840 and became the world's first adhesive postage stamp, D)Gücün bütün ilişkileri beslediği doğrudur, ancak mutlu is the greatest single reform of the English postal bireyler ve tatminkâr evlilikler sadece eşit olarak system since it was established in 1510. paylaşılan güçle yaratılabilir. Y D)The world's first adhesive postage stamp, the Penny E) Gücün bütün ilişkileri beslediği doğrudur, ancak Black, which is the greatest single reform of the sadece eşit olarak paylaşılan güç mutlu bireyler ve English postal system since its establishment in tatminkâr evlilikler yaratabilir. 1510, was issued in 1840. E) The Penny Black, the world's first adhesive postage stamp by the English postal system, was issued in 1840 as its greatest single reform since its establishment in 1510. 40. Çok az insan renklSerin, nesnelerin özellikleri olmadığını ancak gözlerimiz ve beynimizle etkileşen ışığın farklı dalga boylarının bir sonucu olduğunu bilir. 42. Sesinizi yükselttirecek kadar çok gürültüye uzun A) Despite the fact that colours are not the property of süre maruz kalma, kalp krizi oranlarını yüzde 50 objects, few people know that they are a result of arttırabilmektedir, özellikle bu hem işte hem de evde different wavelengths of light that interact with geçerliyse. our eyes and brain. Ö B) Few people know that colours are not the property of A) Being chronically exposed to loud noise and raising your voice can increase heart attack rates by objects but a result of different wavelengths of light 50 percent, especially if this is true at both work and interacting with our eyes and brain. home. C)Realizing that they are not the property of objects, few B) Chronic exposure to noise loud enough to make you people know that colours are a result of different raise your voice by 50 percent can increase heart wavelengths of light that interact with our eyes and attack rates, especially if this happens at both work brain. and home. D)Colours are not the property of objects; however, few C) Chronic exposure to noise loud enough to make you people know that they are a result of different raise your voice can increase heart attack rates by 50 wavelengths of light interacting with our eyes and percent, especially if this is true at both work and brain. home. E) Colours, which are not the property of objects, are D)Being chronically exposed to noise loud enough to known by few people to be a result of different make you raise your voice, especially at both work and wavelengths of light that interact with our eyes and home, can increase heart attack rates by 50 percent. brain. E) Chronic exposure to loud noise can make you raise your voice and increase heart attack rates by 50 percent, especially if this happens at both work and home. 9 43. - 46. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. It is clearly stated in the passage that Ashoka ----. cevaplayınız. A) lived during the same period as the Buddha Beneath a temple thought to mark the location of the B) knew exactly where the Buddha was buried and built a Buddha's birth, archaeologists may have discovered the shrine there physical roots of the religion: an ancient tree shrine that predates all known Buddhist sites. The archaeological C)was a firm believer in the religon that the Buddha record of Buddhism stretches back to the time of M founded centuries earlier Ashoka, an Indian emperor who enthusiastically embraced the religion in the 3rd century BC and built D)dedicated his time to finding the actual birthplace of many temples. The sage known as the Buddha though, the Buddha probably lived about three centuries earlier. The remains of one of Ashoka's temples lie at Lumbinini in E) welcomed the Buddha to his empire to spread his Nepal, which many recognise as the Buddha's religon birthplace. As part of his conservation work, Robert Coningham at Durham University, excavated below the temple foundations. He found evidence of pre-Ashokan stonework and, below that, signs of a timber structure that was radiocarbon dated to between 800 and 550 BC. Y45. The unusual thing about the soil around the timber When the surrounding soil was examined it was found structure was that it was ----. to contain the remains of ancient tree roots, but was strangely free of the debris usually left by human A) full of dead organic matter occupation. This suggests that a tree grew at the centre of the wooden structure, and that the area around it was B) examined by previous excavators regularly cleaned, just as Buddhist tree shrines are cleaned today. C)contaminated by radiation SD)surrounded by ancient trees E) without any human waste 43. It can be understood from the passage that the excavation below the temple at Lumbinini has ----. A) located the remains of an ancient shrine where 46. One can understand from the passage that over the nothing was thought to exist centuries, Buddhist tree shrines have been ----. Ö B) provided little evidence that the Buddha was actually A) built away from royal residences born there B) protected by the warriors of the emperor C)shown that Ashoka was the first emperor to follow the teachings of Buddhism C)kept hidden under temple foundations D)possibly revealed the very first tree shrine in the D)taken care of in a very similar manner Buddhist religion E) enabled archaeologists to make a previously unknown E) constructed of both timber and stone link between Ashoka and the Buddha 10 47. - 50. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. One of the strategies to cope with floods is to ----. cevaplayınız. A) build on areas that are water-resistant The floods causing damage across much of central Europe are a sign of catastrophes to strike as the B) reconstruct wetlands that can take in more surface continent's climate gets harsher. In the German town of water Passau on 3 June 2013, waters rose to their highest level since 1501. At that time, the floods in Czech C)Mdecrease the number of urban areas near rivers capital Prague were beginning to recede but Dresden, Germany, was preparing itself for the river Elbe to rise 5 D)redirect the water that results from melting snow metres higher than normal. "Several factors are responsible", says Stéphane Isoard of the European E) establish a system by which neighbouring countries Environment Agency in Copenhagen, Denmark. "It was inform each other spring, so snow was melting from the mountains," she says. When two months of rain fell in two days, the water had nowhere to go because the ground was soaked. Climate change also causes heavier rainfall, and might be partly to blame. However, Isoard points 49. One can infer from the passage that in central out that bad land management is just as important. "In Europe ----. Y urban areas, there is less opportunity for water to infiltrate the soil. With more floods inevitable, Europe A) extreme weather conditions have brought floods, needs to adapt," Isoard says. Some work is already yet there have not been any attempts to cope with under way. Wetlands are being restored around them stretches of the Danube. Green spaces like this can absorb extra water, making floods less severe. "Over B) the severity of the floods has dramatically decreased the last 20 years, events like this have become more since 2002 thanks to the long-term solutions to common," says Iain White of the University of prevent them Manchester in the UK. "Central Europe has improved its flood responses sinSce 2002, but there comes a point C)heavy rainfall will no longer pose a big threat because where you can't defend," he maintains. urban areas have become more prepared for a possible flood D)there have been some precautions taken against the floods, but they are still not totally effective E) climate change has had a more damaging effect than 47. It is clearly stated in the passage that ----. in any other parts of the world Ö A) bad land management is especially responsible for devastating floods as in Passau B) the rise in water levels in central Europe in 1501 was 50. The primary aim of the author is to ----. more alarming than that of 2013 A) draw attention to how central Europe has recently C)waters from melting snow caused the river Elbe to rise been contributing to climate change 5 meters, resulting in great harm in Prague and Dresden B) warn governments in central Europe to take immediate action to protect themselves against floods D)Prague was more vulnerable to harmful consequences of the flood than Dresden C)give detailed information about the reasons for flooding in central Europe and how to deal with it E) central Europe should be ready for more severe floods as they seem unavoidable D)prove the claims made by researchers like Isoard and White about the floods in central Europe E) exemplify the methods to make the soil absorb more water in central Europe 11 51. - 54. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. As it is stated in the passage, the 1914 July crisis cevaplayınız. ----. A) was due to the conflict between Russia and Germany The influence of technology on diplomacy can be although both were capable of using the telegraph illustrated by leaked and misunderstood telegrams, effectively which shaped the history in unexpected ways. For example, the 1917 Zimmermann telegram (sent by B) resulted from a confusion in understanding telegraph German foreign minister Arthur Zimmermann to the M messages between the Russian and German heads of German Mission in Mexico and intercepted by the state British) instructed the German representative to start negotiating Mexico's entrance into World War I as a German ally by offering Mexico control of the US states C)caused a breakdown in communication systems due of New Mexico, Utah and California after the war. The to technical problems with the telegraph system Zimmermann telegram was leaked at a time when the American public were still neutral and not ready to join D)led to a general distrust of the telegraph system in the World War I. It prompted the United States to join the major countries involved in the conflict Allied forces. The most illustrative case study of the influence of the telegraph on diplomacy was the 1914 E) arose because the telegraph messages could not be July crisis that led to the beginning of the World War I. sent to other capitals such as Paris and Vienna Y Telegraph messages were being sent between St. Petersburg, Berlin, Belgrade, Vienna, Paris and other countries involved in the conflict. However, there was little awareness of how to use the telegraph properly. The Russian czar sent a conciliatory note to Germany, 53. One can understand from the passage that the but the German kaiser had already sent a note that was Germans ----. not conciliatory at all, thus creating communication confusion and mistrust that contributed toward A) could not use diplomacy effectively in the past escalation and ultimately war. A new technology coupled with humanS failure led to an unfortunate B) were not skillful in using the telegraph compared with outcome. other nations C)resorted to sending telegraph messages to form alliances and other diplomatic relations D)relied on the British to intercept their messages 51. The Zimmermann telegram ----. E) were against the development of technology in diplomatic relationships Ö A) redefined the relationship between Germany and Russia B) tried to convince the Mexicans that the British were to invade their country 54. What could be the best title for the passage? C)caused the Mexicans to become suspicious of the A) The Development of the Telegraph United States B) The Use of Telegraph in World War I D)showed Germany's intention to take control of the United States C)The Telegraph and Its Various Uses E) provoked the US government into joining the war D)The Early Days of the Telegraph against Germany E) The Impact of Telegraph on German Diplomacy 12 55. - 58. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. According to the passage, the diet of the Red Lady cevaplayınız. ----. A) was made up of large portions The Paleo diet is very popular these days. The Red Lady of El Mirón cave in northern Spain also ate the Paleo diet almost 19,000 years ago. But it was not a B) was mainly composed of meat trend for her. A close look at the Red Lady's teeth shows that the meat of the hoofed animals, such as red C)Mwas followed by a great number of women in deer and mountain goat, made up about 80 percent of Paleolithic times her diet. Fish seems to have made up most of the rest of her diet. If that sounds a little dull, fear not. D)involved foods eaten especially for nutrition Meticulous dental analysis reveals she also ate some starchy plant material, most likely to have been seeds, E) shows that eating meat is important between the ages plus mushrooms, although probably in small amounts. of 35 and 40 Whether mushrooms were eaten for nutrition or for some other purpose is unknown. Could the diet revealed by this unique fossil from northern Spain make you live a longer, healthier life? Although the surviving bones of the Red Lady suggest she was healthy, her age at death 57. It is implied in the passage that the Paleo diet ----. Y was between 35 and 40. That may have counted as middle-aged for people who lived in Paleolithic A) puts emphasis on strachy plant materials times. Perhaps you had better stick to a balanced diet with five portions of fruit and vegetables a day. B) leads people to have a diet consisting only of meat C)requires eating all types of food in small portions D)does not have direct effects on living a longer life S E) allows people to live as long as the Red Lady 55. As it is stated in the passage, thanks to dental examinations, ----. A) why the Red Lady was not able to live longer than 40 years was known 58. The primary purpose of the author is to ----. B) what the Red Lady's diet included was revealed A) persuade the reader to start the Paleo diet to lead a ÖC)when the Red Lady lived was brought to light long life B) give information about the Paleo diet by providing the D)why the Red Lady's diet depended heavily on meat reader with an example was found C)criticize the reader for not following the healthy Paleo E) where the Red Lady lived in Spain was disclosed diet D)warn the reader against the consequences of following the Paleo diet E) explain the reasons why the Red Lady died at such a young age 13 59. - 62. soruları aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. For the real-life part of the experiment, ----. cevaplayınız. A) 81 hungry people were asked to shop at a department Hunger is known to increase food purchases, but store Alison Jing Xu at the University of Minnesota and her team wanted to know if it also increased desire to buy B) the receipts of the customers were checked to see the non-food items. They asked 63 people to come to the effect of hunger on purchasing lab with an empty stomach. Half were given a piece of M C)the research team reached contrasting findings for the cake to eat before all the volunteers were asked to lab participants and the department store customers examine a binder clip and decide how many they would like. Hungry participants asked for 70 percent more free D)all customers who shopped at the department store clips than those who had just eaten. To find out if the were equally hungry same association held true for real purchases, the team had a look at the receipts of 81 customers leaving a E) 64 percent of the department store customers department store that sold mostly non-food goods. purchased non-food items Customers who were hungrier spent 64 percent more than the others. So, what is going on? When we are hungry, our stomach releases a hormone called ghrelin which acts on an area of the brain that makes people Y not only want to consume calories but also to seek out reward and motivation in buying other things. Jing Xu 61. It can be concluded from both experiments that ----. and her team suggest that consumers better feed themselves before they go shopping. A) shopping leads the stomach to release ghrelin more B) food alone is not enough to motivate hungry people C)spending money is not associated with extreme hunger S 59. It is stated in the passage that ----. D)purchasing is rewarding for people who are not hungry A) 63 people who joined the lab experiment were given E) the effect of ghrelin is not restricted to food information about ghrelin beforehand B) researchers intentionally increased the level of ghrelin of the participants with a slice of cake 62. The study may make people aware that ----. ÖC)participants who had eaten a piece of cake did not want as many binder clips as those who had not A) it is usually the needs that play a key role in how much money people spend when shopping D)the aim was to find out the effect of hunger on purchasing food items B) non-food goods do not attract people when they are hungry E) some of the participants wanted to have more binder clips rather than a piece of cake because they were C)taking part in lab experiments may change their not feeling hungry previous shopping tendencies D)shopping on an empty stomach might result in spending more money than intended E) consumption of unnecessary calories may be demotivating to do shopping 14 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Cahit: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  It says here in the newspaper that although a bulunuz. woman's core body temperature is generally higher than a man's, her hands are usually a few 63. Defne: degrees colder.  Why have you been stirring your tea for so long? You've cooled it off faster. Ayşe:  -M--- Beren:  ---- Cahit:  It must be about women's hormone levels and Defne: relatively smaller muscle mass.  When you stir it, the molecules move faster. So, you quicken the heat loss. Ayşe:  That's interesting! I'd never have thought of it that Beren: way.  Okay, next time I won't stir my tea a lot. A) Does this happen even in mildly cold situations? A) What do you think can be done to reduce the heat loss? Y B) What's the explanation for this? B) What are you trying to say? I can't see any relation between them. C)Are there any situations where a man's hands get colder? C)As far as I know, the purpose of stirring drinks is to help the sugar dissolve in it. D)Don't the blood vessels constrict when temperatures drop? D)I agree that it's much more related to evaporation than to stirring. E) Have you also read anything about the contribution of S blood circulation? E) Do you say the spoon takes away some of the heat during the stirring? Ö 15 65. Okan: 66. Pınar:  Recently, I've been sleeping far less than I  I'm just back from the hospital. The doctor normally do. Do you think this could be related to changed my medication and suggested more rest. stress? Hazal: Sinan:  OK. But why do you look so depressed? It's  Well, we all have stress but how it affects us probably a good thing, right? differs from one person to another. M Pınar: Okan:  ----  ---- Hazal: Sinan:  So, you're worried that your manager won't be  Probably. But I also know people who suffer from very happy with the news. eating disorders due to their stress levels. A) I guess so, but every type of medication has its side A) I think I'm one of those whose sleeping patterns effects along with benefits. are dramatically disturbed. B) No, it's bad news because the new medication is Y B) However, my body needs more sleep than many not covered by my health insurance. people because I work at night. C)I don't think so because I'm supposed to exercise C)These days, I also have poor appetite since I can't get more after work in the evenings. sufficient sleep. D)I'm not sure. That means I'll have to take more days D)Do you mean lack of sleep has both biological and off, so I'll fall behind with my work. psychological reasons? E) It might work better, but I'm afraid it's going to provide E) I agree. People wSho are self-employed tend to have temporary relief. less stress-related problems. Ö 16 67. Student: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en  ---- yakın cümleyi bulunuz. Professor: 68. The latest report from the UN’s Intergovernmental  They're fixed three months before you're born. Panel on Climate Change is more confident than You can leave a mark on them with a cut, ever that most of the warming of the past 60 years is abrasion or acid, but they'll grow back within a humanity’s fault. month. M A) The latest report by the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel Student: on Climate Change underestimated the role of  What about aging? humankind over the warming that occurred during the last 60 years. Professor:  It doesn't have such an effect, but it gets harder to B) A recent report by the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel scan your fingers or take a print from them. on Climate Change is the most convincing one up to now, proving man’s responsibility for the warming that A) Do all people throughout the world have different has taken place over the past 60 years. fingerprints? C)The latest report from the UN’s Intergovernmental Y B) How do they treat finger injuries withoutdamaging Panel on Climate Change confidently proclaimed that one's fingerprints? humankind is partially to blame for the warming of the planet over the past 60 years. C)Are fingerprints utilized in any fields other than forensics? D)A recent report by the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has confidently demonstrated that D)What's the role of fingerprints in upcoming humanity must take responsibility for the warming of technological advances? the planet in the last 60 years. E) Do fingerprints cShange during our lifetime? E) The latest report by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is the most confident one so far to assert that mankind has been responsible for most of the warming over the last 60 years. 69. One should visit the theater not merely for the Ö purpose of entertainment, but rather draw lessons from the play performed on stage. A) The purpose of visiting the theatre is to be entertained rather than draw lessons from the play performed on stage. B) Instead of entertainment, which is not the only intention of a play, one must acquire knowledge with the help of the play acted on stage. C)Paying a visit to the theater must not be for entertaining ourselves; instead, we should understand the messages passed on by the actors. D)Theaters should not be visited with the aim of entertainment alone; instead, one should learn lessons from the play acted on stage. E) Drawing lessons from the play acted on stage rather than being entertained must be the sole reason for visiting the theater. 17 70. Scientists are struggling to understand the strange 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada biology of Rafflesia, one of the world's largest anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek flowers, in case it disappears from the jungle. cümleyi bulunuz. A) It is a well-known fact that Rafflesia, oneof the world's 72. There are a lot of doubts and questions about how largest flowers, will vanish from the jungle soon, which effective antidepressants are. Many professionals in makes scientists interested in understanding its the field of psychology claim that for drugs to work, biology. we M need 'precision medication'. The aim of precision medication is to develop strategies that are best B) One of the world's largest flowers, Rafflesia has suited to each patient's biological, psychological, started to disappear from the jungle; therefore, and social profile. ---- For example, if you have a job, scientists are rushing to study the biology of this large you may be more likely to respond to a specific type flower. of antidepressants. C)There is a possibility that one of the world's largest A) Studies of antidepressant response prediction flowers, Rafflesia, may become extinct from the jungle, continue with millions of dollars and generate data so scientists are working hard to comprehend derived from neurophysiology and genetics. its unusual biology. B) Doctors can now use new technologies in D)Scientists have difficulty in understanding the complex Yneuroimaging to improve treatment that can produce biology of Rafflesia,which is one of the world's largest better results. flowers,as it is about to disappear. C)Certain characteristics, such as socioeconomic E) It is strange that although Rafflesia, one of the world's factors, can predict how someone will respond to a largest flowers, is vanishing from the jungle, scientists drug. are still trying to understand its biology. D)We can understand from large clinical trials that antidepressants do not work as much as we expect Sthem to on average. 71. The notion that we might one day be able to E) We do not need big data studies on antidepressant communicate by thought alone has preoccupied response, as even finding out the complaints of a scientists and science-fiction writers for decades. patient can provide doctors with sufficient information. A) Scientists and science-fiction writers have long been trying to demonstrate that people can actually interact by thought alone. ÖB) Scientists and science-fiction writers have long been thinking that one day people will be able to transmit their ideas not only by words, but also by thought. C)Not only scientists but also science-fiction writers have long been endeavouring to find an answer to the problem regarding thought communication. D)Scientists and science-fiction writers have long been considering the idea that one day it will be possible for people to transmit messages via thought only. E) Scientists have already proven that people can communicate by thought alone, which has also been a popular theme for science-fiction writers for a long time. 18 73. Ethnic groups can differ greatly in appearance, 74. Sons look to their fathers for support and example. dress codes, cultural practices, and religious They need to be instructed and inspired, but beliefs. ---- For instance, the Welsh and the English sometimes fathers cannot meet these needs of their in the UK are most distinctive in terms of their sons. For example, Abraham Lincoln had little to accent and language. Speech style, then, is an learn from his father, Thomas. Abraham Lincoln and important and often central stereotypical or his father differed in almost every way. While normative property of group membership. Thomas could not understand reading as a passion, AbMraham read every book he could get hold of. ---- A) Therefore, communities that live in well-defined Unlike his son Abraham, Thomas was unambitious boundaries exhibit uniformity in the way they use and stubborn. Thus, when Abraham was a young language orally. adult, he turned to the heroes of the past generation for inspiration. B) Yet, communication involves spoken and written languages and a rich mix of expressions which are A) When fathers cannot inspire their children, they often contextualized by ethnicity and nationality. search for father figures among their favourite teachers. C)Nevertheless, language or speech style is often regarded as one of the most distinct and clear markers B) Abraham was not content with his life; therefore, at the of ethnic identity. age of 21, he left his parents' home and rarely saw his Yfather again. D)Besides, the nature of the power and status relations C)Thomas was a good father, as he always supported between ethnic groups in society is influenced by Abraham to read different kinds of books to gain self-respect and pride. different perspectives. E) In addition, ethnic groups that are high on status and D)In addition to their intellectual differences, Thomas have respectful jobs have high ethno-linguistic value. and Abraham were emotionally incompatible, too. SE) Besides, it was hard for Abraham to hide his reactions to the political and social events that occured when he was young. 75. There are some 100 billion galaxies in the observable universe, with about 100 billion stars in Ö each of these galaxies. ---- In fact, there are more planets in the universe than there are sand grains on all the beaches of all the coastlines of all the continents. Yet, in all this immensity, there is only one place where we know there is life – the tiny, fragile blue dot we call Earth. A) The reality is that finding life in remote planets will be very difficult and it will take quite a lot of time. B) Many scientists are trying to explain the origin of the disparate bodies in the solar system. C)Since one of Saturn's moons has been found to have ice fountains, we should be looking more widely for alive bodies. D)In recent years, we have discovered that there are probably more planets than there are stars. E) It is possible to find some kind of life in space, but whether we can talk to it is a matter of debate. 19 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla 79. (I) Bats live in caves to avoid danger and save energy. okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan (II)Some species spend their daytime in caves while cümleyi bulunuz. others hibernate there for the winter because caves provide optimal humidity, a stable low temperature, and 76. (I)Decision-making theories assume that individuals few disturbances from light or noise. (III) Temperature is evaluate the costs and benefits of various actions and important because bats are warm-blooded but very pick the best alternatives in a fairly logical, reasonable small. (IV) Hibernation is a deep state of inactivity in way.(II)Judgements and decisions do not always follow whMich the animals' body temperature decreases. strict rationality.(III)They choose the alternative that (V) Unlike many other mammals, bats let their internal gives them the greatest rewards at the least cost. temperature drop when they are resting, going into a (IV)Decision-making involves weighing the advantages state of decreased activity to conserve energy. and disadvantages of possible alternatives and then adopting the best one.(V)In other words, the relative A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V strengths of the advantages and disadvantages determine the final decision. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 80. (I)Although it was only in recent years that the 3D printing technology became good enough to produce Y more than prototypes, the very idea of printing in 3D is not new. (II) The 3D printing technology development 77. (I) Some people choose not to consume meat as they has been so rapid and quick. (III) Nevertheless, 3D think it comes from animals having consciousness just printers will hardly out-compete existing technologies, as we do.(II)Quite a few people wonder whether plants when it comes to the production of large quantities of have a form of consciousness. (III) It is not really consumer goods and machine parts. (IV) For a long time possible as plants do not have nerve cells, let alone a to come, the technology will probably be more suitable brain.(IV)Some plants can signal to each other, and to for customized goods, spare parts, minor quantity insects, using chemical messenger compounds, but that production, and products difficult to make in a is quite different. (V)SHuman concepts such as emotion conventional way. (V) But experts have no doubt that 3D and self-awareness simply do not apply to plants. printers will be increasingly used in many industries. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 78. (I)By the 12thcentury an aristocratic class of warriors Öhad begun to exercise great power throughout Japan. (II) Their original center, the military government of Minamoto, was located at the coastal town of Kamakura, near modern Tokyo. (III)Known as the Samurai, they dominated Japanese society for nearly 700 years.(IV) However, as power shifted from civil aristocracy to a new bureaucratic regime based on these provincial warriors, the Samurai became famous for offering security through military talent.(V)The ritual where the defeated warrior committed suicide with his own sword was also portrayed in the film The Last Samurai. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V TEST BİTTİ. 20 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. M Y S Ö O 001 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ (27 MART 2016) İNGİLİZCE M 1. D 21. C 41. D 61. E 2. A 22. C 42. C 62. D 3. E 23. E 43. D 63. B 4. C 24. A 44. C 64. B Y 5. B 25. D 45. E 65. A 6. A 26. B 46. D 66. D 7. C 27. C 47. E 67. E S 8. D 28. A 48. B 68. E 9. A 29. A 49. D 69. D 10. E 30. C 50. C 70. C Ö11. A 31. D 51. E 71. D 12. A 32. A 52. B 72. C 13. A 33. C 53. C 73. C 14. B 34. E 54. E 74. D 15. E 35. B 55. B 75. D 16. D 36. B 56. B 76. B 17. A 37. A 57. D 77. A 18. E 38. B 58. B 78. E 19. B 39. E 59. C 79. D 20. E 40. B 60. B 80. A T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (Sonbahar Dönemi) 4 EYLÜL 2016 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S Ö 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE İNGİLİZCE TESTİ Bu tes(cid:257)e 80 soru vardır. 4. That we have the ability to detect and ---- minute 1. - 6. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. differences in the fat content of food suggests that M this ability must have had considerable evolutionary importance. 1. There is new ---- that dinosaurs were warm-blooded like birds and mammals rather than cold-blooded A)discriminate B)hinder like reptiles. C)undermine D)tackle A)compulsion B)frustration E)protect C)evidence D)significance E)fulfillment Y 5. Children who are securely attached to their mother by the time they enter their second year of life are better equipped to ---- new experiences and 2. The tendency towards increasingly bitter chocolate relationships. has its origins in the ---- fall in cocoa prices in the 1980s. A)depend on B)turn down S A)dramatic B)permanent C)refrain from D)cope with C)empirical D)subtle E)carry out E)hectic Ö 6. The success of advertising ultimately ---- whether it influences consumer behaviour. 3. An understanding of the physiology of stress does not ---- clarify its meaning, thus several models have A)breaks in B)disposes of been constructed in an attempt to better define and explain it. C)gives away D)rests on A)arguably B)jointly E)tears apart C)eventually D)completely E)desperately 1 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 9. The Internet provides a platform which enables new 7. - 16. sorularda, cümlede boş bırakılan yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. products ---- more rapidly since it is possible ---- new ideas and concepts through online research. 7. Although Immanuel Kant, one of the greatest A) being developed / testing thinkers in the history of philosophy, ---- many pieces of technical terminology to articulate the B) to develop / to have tested themes of his critical philosophy, perhaps none M ---- more pervasive than a priori. C)developing / to be tested A) was introducing / was D)to be developed / to test B) introduced / is E) having developed / being tested C)had introduced / had been D)used to introduce / has been E) had been introducing / would be Y 10. Education plays an important role ---- improving people's health, and educated people are more likely to be informed consumers of health care, gathering information ---- diseases and potential treatments. A)to / upon B)in / on 8. In cultures that ---- up to more recent times, we ---- further clues to past beliefs. C)at / about D)with / from S A) will survive / need to find E)for / over B) had survived / could find C)survived / would find D)survive / used to find Ö E) have survived / may find 11. Excluding minor skin cancers, breast cancer is the single most common type of cancer ---- women based ---- American Cancer Society data. A)in / from B)with / for C)among / upon D)within / about E)on / of 2 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 12. ---- some people produce irresistibly scented sweat 15. Leonardo da Vinci’s drawings for machines are ---- that insects can detect from 30 m away, they are accurate ---- it has been possible for modern especially attractive to mosquitoes. engineers to build some of them. A)Until B)As A)so / that B)as / as C)Whereas D)Whether C)either / or D)more / than M E)Before E)neither / nor 13. ---- using renewable energy is potentially a means of 16. ---- the promising prospects that carbon capture and combating global warming, renewable energy storage technology offers to prevent air pollution, facilities can be very expensive to establish. it is still a rather new technique requiring much Y more research before it can be utilized on a large A)Unless B)Although scale. C)Just as D)Until A)Owing to B)Rather than E)When C)In spite of D)Similar to E)Except for S 14. Standard Mail Transfer Protocol employs an elaborate letter-and-number code that tells each computer station what it must do with a message ---- it can reach its destination. ÖA)as though B)in case C)so that D)even if E)now that 3 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 17. - 21. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 19. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)to mass-produce B)to have mass-produced Great Britain was one of the most powerful nations in C)having mass-produced D)to be mass-produced the world in the 18th century. Itled the world in (17)---- new sources of energy for making textiles and E)mass-produce concentrating the process in factories. This was the Industrial Revolution. In New England, America, small M factories first appeared in the 1790s. Thereafter, the proportion of manufacturing carried out in northern factories steadily rose (18)---- individual and primitive ways of production. By 1850, Americans were pioneering ways (19)---- clocks and firearms using interchangeable, machine-made parts.Goods poured out of New England and midwestern factories, and they spread (20)---- the world. Industrialization fell behind in the South, (21)---- it was not unknown. Y 20. A)on B)beyond C)across D)against 17. A)accelerating B)utilising E)towards C)challenging D)eliminating S E)recruiting Ö 21. A)as if B)though C)in case D)only if E)just as 18. A)as a result of B)such as C)by means of D)due to E)as opposed to 4 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 22. - 26. sorularda, aşağıdaki parçada 24. numaralanmış yerlere uygun düşen sözcük veya ifadeyi bulunuz. A)Thanks to B)In terms of Reading does not come naturally; it is a difficult skill that C)On behalf of D)Despite must be acquired painfully. (22)---- learnt, however, it is rarely, if ever, forgotten. So, we do not have to worry about forgetting how to read because the skill is E)According to (23)---- established in our long-term memory banks. M (24)---- the retention of the reading skill in permanent memory, an entirely different type of memory is required during the active process of reading itself. While reading, we must retain a 'short-term working memory' for what has just been read. Some of the information acquired while reading (25)---- to long-term memory but much is remembered for just long enough to enable you to understand the text. Memories must somehow be represented physically in the brain. Brain chemistry and structure is altered by experience, and the stability of these physiochemical changes can be associated Y (26)---- the retention duration of memory. 25. A)may be committed B)used to be committed C)would be committed D)had better be committed E)must be committed 22. A)Unless SB)Once C)Until D)Before E)Though Ö 26. A)at B)for C)into D)with E)upon 23. A)coincidentally B)scarcely C)firmly D)moderately E)severely 5 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 29. When someone feels upset about a life event, telling 27. - 36. sorularda, verilen cümleyi uygun şekilde tamamlayan ifadeyi bulunuz. them to cheer up actually makes them feel worse, ----. 27. Some estimates indicate that sea levels could rise A) although pain and sadness are complicated and globally by at least one metre by 2080 ----. unpredictable emotions A) if municipalities immediately take preventive B) since emotional support in stressful situations has M measures positive consequences B) though this anticipation is uniform around the world C)because it simply reminds them that their emotions do not conform to societal expectations C)unless a sudden rise in sea levels threatens most cities D)for it is not easy to get it right, but we should all try D)since glaciers melt and warmer seas expand E) but we all have unique coping strategies and individual preferences E) as coastal areas at extremely low elevations are the most prone to disaster Y 30. Parts of Antarctica are claimed by seven nations: Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New 28. The world's cities are home to more than half of the Zealand, Norway, and the United Kingdom, ----. global population ----. A) given that Antarctica is generally described as having A) so they are facinSg unprecedented pressure and two parts, West Antarctica and East Antarctica demand for investment in infrastructure and urban development B) but Antarctica is located in the far south, and is extremely cold, even during the summer B) until they gain recognition as one of the fastest developing regional players in the local sector C)therefore, it ranks fifth in size among the world’s continents, being larger than Australia or Europe C)since firms around the world are trying hard to sign a contract to get involved in cities' recreation process D)for example, about 98 percent of the land area is Ö permanently covered with ice D)so that new industrial projects can be designed to deal with the problems resulting from overpopulation E) however, their territories are not recognized by the international community E) but governments hope that public transportation systems will encourage people to get out of their cars 6 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 31. Children learn that some types of lying are 33. Although the first railroads date back to the mid-16th permissible and encouraged; ----. century used by horsedrawn mining vehicles, ----. A) for example, they can pretend to be happy with a gift A) in 1916, the world's longest continuous rail line was they dislike to avoid hurting the giver's feelings completed – the 5,600-mile Trans-Siberian railroad took 25 years to build B) however, lying to protect oneself from punishment is a behaviour that appears in very young children B) railroads continue to dominate as freight carriers in the M US and in the rest of the industrialised world C)therefore, lying to others is most often seen as an interpersonal failure because it damages trust C)it was in the early 1800s when they began to really proliferate and push the Industrial Revolution into high D)on the contrary, it may seem reasonable to assume gear that the maintenance of social interaction can require lying D)trains still rank higher than most other means of transportation as efficient carriers of freight and E) as a result, parents are generally upset about their passengers children's lying since it is considered socially unacceptable E) rail lines crisscrossing South America in the late 1800s helped strengthen the Latin American economy Y 32. Although there is no standard definition for a smartphone, ----. 34. While some hunter-gatherer communities exist even today ----. A) it is a mobile phoSne with advanced functions in its basic sense A) hunter-gatherer communities lived by searching out food and other things they needed rather than growing B) the first smartphone had a calendar, a calculator, and or manufacturing them fax capabilities B) the era of hunter-gatherers ended about ten thousand C)its applications are not often included when you buy it years ago with the appearance of the first agricultural societies D)whether the smartphone will simply be a computer in C)all hunter-gatherers lived during what is called the the future is not certain Ö 'Palaeolithic Era', which means the era of 'Old Stone E) the number of people using smartphones is increasing Age' day by day D) many gathered the resources they needed for food, for shelter and clothing, and for ritual activities and other purposes E) scholars usually study the physical remains from hunter-gatherer communities in the absence of written evidence 7 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 35. It is not an easy decision for company founders to 37. - 42. sorularda, verilen İngilizce cümleye sell their businesses ----. anlamca en yakın Türkçe cümleyi, Türkçe cümleye anlamca en yakın İngilizce cümleyi bulunuz. A) no matter how much wealth a good sales deal promises to bring to the owner 37. James Hansen, a climatologist at Columbia University, critically expressed that as long as fossil B) as long as successful entrepreneurs can build fuels are the cheapest fuels in the market, they will companies with great values continue to be used. M C)even though some employees feel betrayed after a A) James Hansen, fosil yakıtların piyasadaki en ucuz company has been sold yakıtlar olduğu sürece kullanılmaya devam edileceğini eleştirel bir şekilde ifade ettiğinde Kolombiya D)thanks to being really optimistic about the bright future Üniversitesi'nde iklim bilimciydi. of their company B) İklim bilimci James Hansen, fosil yakıtların piyasadaki E) since whether to sell relies partly on the attitudes of en ucuz yakıtlar olduğu sürece kullanılmaya devam their new customers edileceğini Kolombiya Üniversitesi'nde eleştirel bir şekilde ifade etti. C)Kolombiya Üniversitesi'nde iklim bilimci olan James Y Hansen, fosil yakıtların piyasadaki en ucuz yakıtlar olduğu sürece kullanılmaya devam edileceğini eleştirel bir şekilde ifade etmiştir. 36. After securing political and economic stability and D)Fosil yakıtların, piyasadaki en ucuz yakıtlar olduğu overcoming severe flooding, ----. sürece, kullanılmaya devam edileceğini eleştirel bir şekilde ifade eden, Kolombiya Üniversitesi'ndeki iklim A) about half of Thailand’s workforce is employed in the bilimci James Hansen'dı. agriculture sector SE) Kolombiya Üniversitesi'nde iklim bilimci olan James B) the Thai economy depends mainly on automotive and Hansen, fosil yakıtların piyasadaki en ucuz yakıtlar electronics manufacturing oldukları için kullanılmaya devam edileceğini eleştirel bir şekilde ifade etti. C)Thailand is now becoming attractive to foreign investors with its ability to recover D)the majority of the population in Thailand are ethnic Thais besides a large ethnic Chinese minority Ö E) Thailand also exports processed foods like frozen shrimp and canned pineapple 8 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 38. There are over 100 trillion bacteria in our body, most 39. Although sleep disorder has negative effects on of which are in the guts, and they support essential almost all of the occupations throughout the world, functions like digestion, immunity and mental it is a particular source of concern for those who health. work the night shift. A) Sindirim, bağışıklık ve akıl sağlığı gibi önemli A) Gece vardiyasında çalışanlar için özel bir endişe fonksiyonları destekleyen ve vücudumuzda çoğunlukla kaynağı olan uyku bozukluğu, artık tüm dünyada bağırsaklarda bulunan 100 trilyondan fazla bakteri Mhemen hemen bütün meslekler üzerinde olumsuz vardır. etkiler yaratmaktadır. B) Vücudumuzdaki 100 trilyondan fazla bakterinin çoğu B) Uyku bozukluğu, gece vardiyasında çalışanlar için özel bağırsaklardadır ve bunlar sindirim, bağışıklık ve akıl bir endişe kaynağı oluştursa da dünya çapındaki sağlığı gibi önemli fonksiyonları desteklemektedir. hemen hemen bütün meslekler üzerinde olumsuz etkilere sahiptir. C)Vücudumuzda bulunan 100 trilyonu aşkın bakterinin çoğu bağırsaklarda yaşar ve sindirim, bağışıklık ve akıl C)Uyku bozukluğu, tüm dünyada neredeyse bütün sağlığı gibi önemli fonksiyonları destekler. meslekler üzerinde olumsuz etkilere sahip olmasına rağmen, en çok gece vardiyasında çalışanlar için özel D)Vücudumuzda çoğu bağırsaklarda olan 100 trilyondan bir endişe kaynağı oluşturmaktadır. fazla bakteri vardır ve bunlar sindirim, bağışıklık ve Y akıl sağlığı gibi önemli fonksiyonları desteklemektedir. D)Uyku bozukluğu, dünya genelindeki hemen hemen bütün meslekler üzerinde olumsuz etkiler E) Sindirim, bağışıklık ve akıl sağlığı gibi önemli oluşturmaktadır ancak gece vardiyasında çalışanlar fonksiyonları destekleyen 100 trilyonu aşkın bakteri, için özel bir endişe kaynağıdır. vücudumuzda çoğunlukla bağırsaklarda bulunmaktadır. E) Uyku bozukluğu, dünya çapında neredeyse bütün meslekler üzerinde olumsuz etkilere sahip olsa da gece vardiyasında çalışanlar için özel bir endişe kaynağıdır. S Ö 9 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 40. Albert Einstein, ışığın sürekli bir dalgadan ziyade 41. Rüzgar basit tabirle yüksek basınç bölgelerinden küçük enerji parçacıklarından, diğer bir deyişle daha alçak basınç bölgelerine hava akışı anlamına fotonlardan oluştuğunun düşünülebileceği fikrini gelir ve sıvılarla aynı fizik kanunlarına tabidir. ortaya koyduğu için 1921'de fizik dalında Nobel Ödülü'nü kazanmıştır. A) What is simply meant by wind is that it is the flow of air from areas of high pressure to those of lower A) Albert Einstein's winning the Nobel Prize in physics in pressure, and it obeys the same laws of physics as 1921 is due to his idea that light can be thought of as Mfluids. being composed of tiny particles of energy, or B) The meaning of wind is simply the flow of air from high photons, rather than as one continuous wave. pressure areas to the areas of lower pressure in B) Albert Einstein proposed that light can be thought of addition to following the same physics laws just as as being composed of small particles of energy, or fluids do. photons, rather than as one continuous wave, and he C)Wind simply means the flow of air from areas of high won the Nobel Prize in physics in 1921. pressure to those of lower pressure, and it obeys the C)Albert Einstein put forward the idea that light can be same laws of physics as fluids. thought of as being composed of tiny particles of D)Because wind obeys the same laws of physics as energy, or photons, rather than as one continuous fluids, it simply means the flow of air from areas of wave, and therefore won the Nobel PrizeY in physics in high pressure to those of lower pressure. 1921. E) Wind flows from high pressure areas to lower pressure D)Albert Einstein won the Nobel Prize in physics in 1921 areas, which simply means that it obeys the same when he proposed that light can be thought of as laws of physics as fluids. being composed of little particles of energy, or photons, rather than as one continuous wave. E) Albert Einstein won the Nobel Prize in physics in 1921 for introducing the idea that light can be thought of as S being composed of tiny particles of energy, or photons, rather than as one continuous wave. Ö 10 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 42. Başarılı bir portre ressamı olan Samuel Morse elektromanyetizmayı ilk duyduğunda mesajların bir kablo üzerinden elektrik aracılığıyla nasıl gönderilebileceği üzerine hemen çalışmaya başlamıştır. A) As soon as Samuel Morse, a brilliant portrait artist, had heard about electromagnetism, he at once started M to study how electricity could be used to send messages over a wire. B) Samuel Morse, who quickly began studying how messages could be sent over a wire through electricity when he first heard about electromagnetism, was a skillful portrait artist. C)When Samuel Morse, an accomplished portrait artist, first heard about electromagnetism, he immediately began studying how messages could be sent over a wire via electricity. Y D)Having heard about electromagnetism for the first time, Samuel Morse, who was a proficient portrait artist, quickly began studying how messages could be sent over a wire through electricity. E) What made Samuel Morse, a talented portrait artist, immediately begin studying how messages could be sent over a wire using electricity was that he learned S of electromagnetism. Ö 11 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 43. - 46. soruları, aşağıdaki parçaya göre 44. Why does the author nominate Einstein instead of cevaplayınız. Newton as the greatest genius of all time? A) Newton failed to make a difference when compared to Who is the greatest genius of all time? As a scientist, other scientists of his time no matter how I believe that we should first define what genius is to significant his works and findings were. answer that question. Traditionally, it is the ability to be more creative and skilled than anyone else, or the first B) Einstein earned a reputation as the most special one to glimpse new shores of knowledge. The history of M of the great geniuses of his time while Newton did not science and technology is rich with great minds, but who have many competitors. is the greatest? For me, it is close between Einstein and Newton, but in Newton's time, there were not many C)Einstein had the privilege of collaborating with some of people doing science. However, at the start of the the most successful scientists of his period, 20th century, when Einstein was working, there were lots including Dirac, Heisenberg and Bohr. of other great scientists such as Paul Dirac, Wener Heisenberg, Niels Bohr and several others. Even D)Einstein seems to have been more industrious with the amongst them, Einstein was considered special. Some theories he developed while Newton was not very people may say this is a lazy choice, but I have thought inventive. long about it, and I feel it is right. The three theories that E) Einstein, with his papers, contributed a lot more to the he published in four papers are some of the greatest Yway we see the Universe than Newton. ideas ever to come out of the human mind – he proved that atoms exist with his paper on Brownian motion, discovered the fact that light is made up of packets of energy, and the whole field of cosmology and most of modern astronomy were born from Einstein's General Theory of Relativity. He changed forever the way we understand our Universe. Even now, when we talk about the possibility of a big idea changing science, we say 45. Scientists say "we need another Einstein" when ----. "we need another Einstein". S A) they talk about the existence of atoms, as it was proved by one of the theories proposed by Einstein B) they make reference to one of the ideas presented in the General Theory of Relativity 43. It is clear from the passage that in order to be a C)there is a need for some vision that is supposed to genius, one needs to ----. make a substantial change in science ÖA) have the necessary traits that allow him or her to be D)they want to underline the fact that Einstein can be more innovative and talented than others considered as the father of cosmology and modern astronomy B) come up with papers which can lead to remarkable E) there is a need to establish the relationship between scientific breakthroughs the light and energy C)be the one with the highest level of understanding of a scientific subject D)follow the footsteps of Einstein or Newton, two of the greatest minds in the history of science E) become knowledgeable in multiple fields of science 46. Which of the following best describes the author's during his or her career attitude toward Einstein? A)indifferent B)satirical C)impartial D)appreciating E)disappointed 12 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 47. - 50. soruları, aşağıdaki parçaya göre 48. The old industrial societies find it hard to battle with cevaplayınız. the developing countries because ----. A) it is cost-effective to hire labour there Growing state intervention in education has been, in part at least, a response to globalization. Increasing global integration has at least partially demolished the B) their manufacturing industries are outdated walls around national economies and made it more difficult for governments to protect industries against MC)developing countries have a higher level of state foreign competition. One of the few ways in which intervention in education governments can increase the international competitiveness is through investment in humans by D)they have been exposed to more foreign influence putting resources into education and training. This than developing countries particularly applies to the old industrial societies. Their traditional manufacturing industries cannot compete with E) they have only focused on the service sector those of developing countries where labour costs are far lower. This also applies to clerical work and data processing. The industrial societies can compete only by upgrading their skills and improving their knowledge and experience. This also means that it is the more Y highly educated members of these societies who will flourish. According to a study, those who can only do routine production and service work will lose out, while it 49. It can be understood from the study mentioned in is the highly educated ' bolic analysts' ─ scientists, the passage that ----. consultants, engineers, financial experts, and all those who can manipulate oral and visible bols ─ whose A) manual workers will become the most important ring of skills and knowledge are in global demand. The the labour chain for the first time implication is that inequality will be more related to the level of education than ever before. B) more and more state intervention in education is going to be needed S C)the level of education has never been more important than now in terms of inequality D)clerical work and data processing will be paid more attention in the coming years 47. Why do governments invest more in education and training? E) globalization has actually not been so influential in blurring the walls around national economies A) To take the education system under control Ö B) To provide a healthy integration of the society with the rest of the world C)To be able to compete with other nations D)To help stop the globalization process 50. What could be the best title for the passage? E) To avoid the impact of successful companies from A) State Intervention in Education rival countries B) Education and Globalization C)Industrialization for Globalization D)Education in Developing Countries E) Future of Education in Industrial Societies 13 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 51. - 54. soruları, aşağıdaki parçaya göre 52. It is clear from the passage that the southwestern cevaplayınız. US ----. A) has already taken some precautions for the Australia experienced the worst and most consistent anticipated drought period of drought in its recorded history over much of the past decade. The Murray River failed to reach the B) bears certain resemblance to some parts of Australia sea for the first time ever in 2002. Fires swept much of in their proneness to climatic devastation the country, and dust storms covered major cities for M days. Australia's sheep population dropped by 50 C)is likely to experience a more severe drought when percent, and rice and cotton production collapsed in compared to Australia some years. The drought ended in 2010 with heavy rains and flooding. Australia's Millennium Drought is a D)is luckier than Australia in terms of geographical wake-up call for residents of the drought-plagued characteristics southwestern US where droughts have devastating consequences to the region and to the nation. The E) tries to make the Colorado River flow to the sea again US can avoid the worst, however, if they pay attention to Australia's experience and learn the right lesson. Both Australia and the US have dry regions where thirsty cities and irrigated agriculture are exhausting water Y supplies and damaging ecosytems. The Colorado River no longer flows to the sea in most years. Changing global climate in both countries increases the risk of 53. Which of the following can be inferred from the drought. As the climate continues to change, smart passage? water planning may help ease the impacts of A) The US inevitably experiences the impacts of unexpected and severe droughts in the US that now a drought despite their smart water planning systems. appear inevitable. B) If the US does not collaborate with Australia, it may not recover from the approaching drought. S C)The US seems to be ignorant of the warnings 51. As a result of Australia's Millennium Drought, ----. concerning a possible drought. A) people were not able to cope with heavy rains and D)The US should produce effective solutions to drought flooding since its climate is more threatening than that of Australia. B) more people began to utilize the Murray River E) One positive outcome of the Millennium Drought is ÖC)the government came up with plans to restore water that it can call public attention to climate change. D)fires and dust storms triggered the climate change E) there was a sharp decline in livestock and agricultural production 54. What is the main purpose of the passage? A) Revealing the basic similarities between the Murray River and the Colorado River B) Criticising the reluctance of the US to take action to prevent a possible drought C)Pointing to the need for the US to take lessons from the drought in Australia D)Emphasizing the disastrous effects of the drought experienced in Australia E) Explaining how to save limited water supplies and ecosystems destroyed in both Australia and the US 14 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 55. - 58. soruları, aşağıdaki parçaya göre 56. According to the passage, lately, it has been cevaplayınız. declared that ----. A) when the Zachariæ Isstrøm glacier started to retreat is Greenland faces a great risk of losing substantial unknown amounts of its glaciers, which could result in more sea level rise. One of these immense glaciers that drain the B) the Zachariæ Isstrøm glacier has already begun to vast Greenland ice sheet has recently begun to retreat. dump all its ice at sea It could eventually contribute half a metre to sea level M rise. Some of Greenland's glaciers rest in deep fjords, C)the Zachariæ Isstrøm glacier is currently in a steady and as the water warms, their leading edges melt. The position ice within them is also moving towards the sea faster ─ so more is being dumped in the sea. The process began D)the Zachariæ Isstrøm glacier will presumably continue with the vast Jakobshavn glacier in the west, followed by retreating the Petermann and Humboldt in the north. Recently, it has been announced that the Zachariæ Isstrøm glacier E) the Zachariæ Isstrøm glacier stopped melting in the in the north-east began to retreat in 2012 and its flow year of 2012 towards the sea has also accelerated. "Now it's unstable and it's going to retreat even more," says Jeremie Mouginot of the University of California. The Y next glacier to the north, Nioghalvfjerdsfjorden, could follow suit. The floating ice shelf that protects it is thinning and could soon be lost. Most of the ice shelves 57. The underlined word "accelerated" is closest in in the seas around Greenland have already meaning to ----. disappeared. "The melt will add millimetres to sea levels over the coming decades," says Mouginot. A)evolved B)increased C)emerged D)altered E)expired S 55. It is clearly stated in the passage that Greenland's glaciers ----. 58. What does the passage mainly focus on? A) have slowed down their movement towards sea A) How to prevent Greenland's glaciers from melting B) started to melt first with Petermann and Humboldt B) The comparison of Greenland's different glaciers Öglaciers C)have caused an increase in sea levels because of C)The consequence of melting in Greenland's glaciers melting D)Research on Greenland's glaciers D)have begun to melt from the middle to the edges E) The disappearance of ice shelves around Greenland E) used to rest in fjords before they moved towards the sea 15 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 59. - 62. soruları, aşağıdaki parçaya göre 60. It is clear from the passage that Manu Prakash ----. cevaplayınız. A) believes that the Foldscope might soon replace the classical microscopes in laboratories Imagine a world where every child owns a microscope. A clever new method to fold a single sheet of paper to B) initially considered the Foldscope as a cheap way of create a microscope may bring that dream closer to detecting diseases reality. In the Foldscope, invented by Stanford University engineers, folded paper creates a structure, which holds M C)devised the Foldscope to help the new generation of a lens and a LED in alignment. As users look, adjust the scientists who look for excitement lens and change the focus, they can magnify objects more than 2,000 times with this simple, affordable and D)invented the Foldscope as he was highly interested in easily portable assembly. This level of magnification is microscopic world close to what you can achieve with most laboratory microscopes. Leading developer Manu Prakash E) thinks that students are inspired by the scientists who originally saw the Foldscope as an inexpensive way to are candidates for the Nobel Prize diagnose diseases in developing countries. But he soon realized it could also help excite a new generation of scientists. "You learn to appreciate the microscopic world by actually exploring it yourself," he says. The Y inventors launched a beta test to see how the invention works in real practice. More than 11,000 applicants from 61. It is pointed out in the passage that ----. 130 countries – ranging from six-year-olds to scientists nominated for the Nobel Prize – volunteered to use the A) the beta test showed that the Foldscope could Foldscope for an original research project. They plan to work well in real practice study bee parasites and identify micro-fossils. Reproducing those experiments may inspire students to B) a remarkable variety of people were willing to use the make their own discoveries. If only every biology book Foldscope in their studies had a Foldscope as the last page because we are not just imparting knowSledge, but we are also imparting the C)the Foldscope produces the most reliable results in tools to gain that knowledge. the study of bee parasites or micro-fossils D)scientists nominated for the Nobel Prize helped the six-year-olds to use the Foldscope in the beta test E) many similar experiments were reproduced to see the efficiency of the Foldscope 59. It is stated in the passage that the Foldscope ----. Ö A) is an original method to fold paper that children might favour B) is a new kind of magnifier that can also work without a 62. The author is of the opinion that the Foldscope ----. lens or a LED A) needs to be greatly improved to be used in original C)is an easy-to-carry microscope whose primary material research projects is paper B) should go beyond biology books and used in D)can magnify objects better than many microscopes laboratories to make detailed studies like those on used in laboratories micro-fossils E) can also be created by children as it has quite a C)has become very popular just because the scientists simple design nominated for the Nobel Prize have been using it D)was originally designed to be used at schools but now it is being utilized especially for medical purposes E) might be a good educational tool that can dramatically foster scientific endeavour 16 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 63. - 67. sorularda, karşılıklı konuşmanın boş 64. Journalist: bırakılan kısmını tamamlayabilecek ifadeyi  Can you tell us briefly what accounting is? bulunuz. Accountant: 63. Radio Presenter:  Basically, accounting is a body of principles for  So, here we have Dr. Henstridge from the recording financial information related to a University of Edinburgh who analyses people's company's resources and its use in meeting the brains in his lab. How do you persuade people to Mcompany's goals. agree to donate their brain after death? Journalist: Dr. Henstridge:  ----  These are people who participated in a project 70 years ago in which they had their IQ tested. We Accountant: then sent them a letter so they had the opportunity  Preparation for the field is provided by secondary to think about it with their family without any schools, business schools, or universities. pressure. A) Why is accounting critical to the functioning of Radio Presenter: companies?  ---- YB) Why did you choose to be an accountant? Dr. Henstridge:  It is the only one where we have a good idea about C)What makes a successful accountant? their intelligence levels when they were young. D)What does it take to be an accountant? A) What kind of information is gained in your project by analysing donated brains? E) What are the generally-accepted accounting principles? B) Can you tell us a bit about the profile of those people who donated theSir brain? C)What's the difference between IQ in the childhood and in the old age? D)How long are you planning to pursue this research? E) There are several other brain banks, why is yours different? Ö 17 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 65. Erkan: 66. Bilge:  According to the psychology magazine I was  I can't believe there are still some people who reading yesterday, people love betting on the think the wealthy have limitless leisure time. World Cup, but making predictions about uncertain events actually reduces the enjoyment Kerem: in them.  ---- Nergis: MBilge:  Why is that? I believe that when you bet in favor of  Yes, I do. The well-off people I know work 80 a team, you support that team during the game, hours per week inventing and producing things. and it makes the experience more meaningful and fun for you. Kerem:  It seems they don't really have so much free time Erkan: after all.  ---- A) Do you think they'd like to have a lot of leisure time? Nergis:  It really doesn't make any sense to me. I think the B) Do you feel it is unfair for us to have limited leisure satisfaction one can get from making the right time unlike them? Y choice can balance that out. C)Do you think they are rich because they have wealthy A) Some people focus on potential gains in life and play families? to win, while others try to prevent negative outcomes and just want to avoid losing. D)I don't think having a lot of free time means resting a lot, do you? B) Psychologists say the opposite. They say the possibility of being wrong in your prediction hangs E) I see you disagree with what they say, don't you? over your head, so you can't enjoy the game. S C)Well, it was mentioned in an article that people's anxiety level increases when they watch sports events and that people with heart problems should stay away from going to stadiums. D)You may have a point there, but remember that betting on football matches puts even more pressure on the players in the field. ÖE) The authors of the article acknowledge that betting on sports events like football can make a person win huge sums of money as well. 18 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 67. Kemal: 68. - 71. sorularda, verilen cümleye anlamca en  Can you have a look at this headline? It says ear yakın cümleyi bulunuz. genes are linked to musical talent. What does that mean? 68. Many districts in Arizona are considering the possibility of lowering the age of partial Onur: responsibility to 12 due to the increase in the  Well, it suggests musical talent may partly be due to genes determining the structure of the inner M number of crimes committed by criminals under the ear. age of 14. A) Many local authorities in Arizona are thinking of Kemal: lowering the age of partial responsibility to 12 in order  ---- to prevent crimes committed by criminals under the age of 14. Onur:  OK. If you have an excellent inner ear structure, B) Crimes committed by those under the age of 14 are you can play the tunes you hear without looking at becoming more common, and thus many localities in the notes. Arizona are thinking of lowering the age of partial responsibility to 12. A) What do you mean in layman's terms? Y C)The possibility of lowering the age of partial B) Do you think this can change later with new research? responsibility to 12 is being discussed in many regions of Arizona because of the immensely growing number C)Are you interested in the link between genes and of crimes committed by 14-year-old individuals. talent? D)The increasing number of criminals under the age of D)Do you really believe that genes can have an impact 14 has led to an agreement in localities in Arizona to on musical talent? lower the age of partial responsibility to 12. E) Doesn't it soundS incredible that genes can be that E) Criminals under the age of 14 are committing more important? crimes than ever before, which will probably force the authorities in Arizona to consider lowering the age of partial responsibility to 12. Ö 19 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 69. Even though there is sufficient water available to 71. Like other interventions, hypnotheraphy can be cover the demands of the world population, there is regarded as effective only if it proves more powerful a shortage of clean water due to increased pollution. than a placebo. A) We are consuming clean water in order to satisfy our A) Hypnotheraphy is similar to other practices in that it is demands but there is increasing contamination all over considered as effective as a placebo. the world. B) Similar to other treatments, hypnotheraphy could be M B) It is necessary to have sufficient water to cover the influential even if a placebo is actually stronger. demands of all people as increased pollution causes a shortage of clean water. C)Provided that hypnotheraphy becomes stronger than a placebo, it can be considered as effective as other C)Increased contamination leads to a shortage of clean applications. water in spite of the availability of water enough to meet the needs of the world population. D)Even if hypnotheraphy acts as a placebo, it may be as effective as many other treatments. D)Despite increased pollution and a shortage of water, there should be enough water to satisfy the demands E) Although it is like other practices, hypnotheraphy can of people. be more effective than a placebo. E) Because of increased pollution and a shYortage of water, we should find enough resources to satisfy our water demand. S 70. Despite the fact that obesity is one of the biggest causes of preventable deaths after smoking and is linked to chronic diseases, obesity rates keep increasing. A) Although chronic diseases that are associated with obesity and smoking can be avoided, the number of people who die of obesity and who become chronically ill goes up. Ö B) The number of people who suffer from obesity continues to rise even though, along with smoking, it is one of the major factors that account for avoidable deaths and causes long-term diseases. C)In spite of being one of the major causes of deaths that can be avoided and resulting in serious diseases, the number of people who are obese is still higher than the number of people who smoke. D)The rate of obesity and the number of people who smoke continue to go up even though they are the main causes of deaths that can be prevented and are connected with chronic diseases. E) Obesity and smoking are illnesses that can lead to preventable deaths, and they are associated with chronic diseases; however, people still continue to suffer from obesity and smoking-related diseases. 20 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 72. - 75. sorularda, boş bırakılan yere, parçada 73. People strive for success, which motivates them to anlam bütünlüğünü sağlamak için getirilebilecek continuously strive for greater achievements. cümleyi bulunuz. However, the strength of this motivation can vary greatly from person to person. ---- People lacking 72. Floating and flying above us are not only the usual self-confidence tend to give up on a task much suspects – birds, bats, insects – but countless sooner than people with a strong belief in their own microscopic creatures as well. The discipline of abilities. People's levels of motivation are also aeroecology explores how animals, plants and other Mconnected to their beliefs concerning the causes of organisms live in, move through and interact with events. the aerosphere. ---- Instruments are now so precise that these technical observations can spot a single A) Among other things, it depends on the value an bee at about 45 km away. individual places on his or her own performance. A) How animals are sensing, using and adapting to B) While some sources of motivation are biological and changes in atmospheric conditions is not interesting directly promote survival, others are learned. for some people. C)Because emotions can both trigger and maintain B) A whole world of invisible creatures inhabit the behaviour, they are motivators of human actions. aerosphere, which contains more than 100,000 living things. YD)External incentives also act as a motivator for a certain type of behaviour or action. C)Air, as an environment, can lead to surprising interactions between living and non-living things. E) The concept of motivation explains why people strive D)There are still many mysterious organisms that to achieve particular goals. ecologists cannot define. E) This science has seen huge gains because of the growing ability to track air movement with radar and telemetry. S 74. For thousands of years, man and wolf have been together as allies and companions. A natural instinct that bonds them still exists. Drawing on human interactions with wolves, a team of doctors came up with wolf therapy to work towards repairing the empathy and self-esteem deficits among young Ö adults. ---- The progress they make builds their motivation to complete the program and reduces the risk of reverting back to old harmful habits. A) Wolves have been rescued from dire circumstances, including abuse, neglect and abandonment. B) Treatment centres are technologically advanced and have perfect facilities. C)The treatment is designed to ease depression, anxiety and stress among those in the rehabilitation programs. D)One of the challenges that therapists face is the difficulty in obtaining permission to capture wild animals. E) A wolf has a unique capacity for engaging people's emotions and breaking through their defense mechanisms. 21 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 75. The way that interpersonal attraction develops is 76. - 80. sorularda, cümleler sırasıyla related partly to how we select a mate. Typically, okunduğunda parçanın anlam bütünlüğünü bozan men prefer women with the classic shapely body cümleyi bulunuz. figure, probably because it signifies youthfulness, 76. (I) T he brain is very good at warning us for threats, and it good health and fertility. However, there are cultural is also skillful at letting us know when a threat no longer and ecological influences. ---- In modern Western exists.(II) However, sometimes this system fails, and societies, where heaviness may indicate ill health, unpleasant associations stick around leading to a men prefer slimmer women. M malfunction thought to be at the root of post-traumatic stress disorder. (III) New research has identified a A) In the United States, a woman's physical beauty is neuronal circuit responsible for the brain's ability to get considered to be an ultimately important factor in rid of bad memories. (IV) The hunt to find medication partner-choosing. that can slow or halt the progression of Alzheimer's B) In traditional agricultural societies, being thin may disease is on. (V) This finding could have implications for treating a broad range of anxiety disorders including mean having a serious disease, so men prefer their post-traumatic stress disorder. women to be heavier. C)If a woman lacks fertility in Far Eastern societies, this A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V may deter men from choosing her as a wife. Y D)Youthful appearance, body and facial metry have all become points of interest for American men. E) Traditional societies have the conception that good genes cannot find their place in heavy bodies, which cause women to lose youthfulness. 77. (I) The cuttlefish is brilliant at hiding itself from enemies in water. (II) It can change the colour, pattern and texture of its skin to blend in with almost any environment, making it all but invisible to predators. S (III)Now, a team of researchers at Harvard University has moved a step closer to unlocking the secrets of this master of disguise, and potentially creating better camouflage for the military. (IV) The cuttlefish's skin is loaded with neurally-controlled, pigmented organs called chromatophores. (V) As well as being used in military camouflage, the team says the findings could also have applications in materials for paints, cosmetics or even consumer electronics. Ö A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 22 2016-YDS Sonbahar /İNGİLİZCE 78. (I) A French company has just developed an artificial heart which has been approved for human testing in many countries. (II) This artificial heart weighs 900 g and consists of two chambers separated by a biological layer. (III) The heart is energised by two lithium batteries, providing over 230 million heartbeats, which corresponds to a five-year life. (IV)If the heart is used universally, it could save the lives of more than 100,000 M people suffering from various heart diseases that can now only be cured by a donor heart. (V) Previous attempts to produce a similar device have led to a decrease in heart transplants. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Y 79. (I) In 1493, when Christopher Columbus started his second voyage to the Americas, he took sugar cane with him. (II) He planted the continent's first sugar cane in Hispaniola, the site, not coincidentally, of a great slave revolt a few hundred years later. (III)Within decades mills producing sugar proliferated in Jamaica and Cuba, where rainforest had been cleared and the native population had been eliminated by disease or S war, or enslaved. (IV) Tobacco and cotton were also grown in the 1700s on Barbados Island plantations by the slaves.(V) The Portuguese created an effective but brutal model, making Brazil into an early boom colony, with more than 100,000 slaves producing tons of sugar. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Ö 80. (I)Most house plants need a period of rest during the year when watering must be reduced.(II)The rest period is brought on by the reduction in available light at certain times of the year. (III) When a plant is not watered enough, the soil in the pot becomes quite dry and compacted. (IV)Giving excess water at this time inevitably encourages plant growth. (V) However, if this is not supported by adequate light, it results in poor growth. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V TEST BİTTİ. 23 CEVAPLARINIZI KONTROL EDİNİZ. M Y S Ö O 001 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) SONBAHAR DÖNEMİ (4 EYLÜL 2016) İNGİLİZCE M 1. C 21. B 41. C 61. B 2. A 22. B 42. C 62. E 3. D 23. C 43. A 63. E 4. A 24. D 44. B 64. D Y 5. D 25. A 45. C 65. B 6. D 26. D 46. D 66. E 7. B 27. D 47. C 67. A S 8. E 28. A 48. A 68. B 9. D 29. C 49. C 69. C 10. B 30. E 50. B 70. B Ö11. C 31. A 51. E 71. C 12. B 32. A 52. B 72. E 13. B 33. C 53. E 73. A 14. C 34. B 54. C 74. C 15. A 35. A 55. C 75. B 16. C 36. C 56. D 76. D 17. B 37. C 57. B 77. D 18. E 38. D 58. C 78. E 19. A 39. E 59. C 79. D 20. C 40. E 60. B 80. C T.C. Ölçme, Seçme ve Yerleştirme Merkezi Z YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI (YDS) İNGİLİZCE (İlkbahar Dönemi) 2 NİSAN 2017 Bu testlerin her hakkı saklıdır. Hangi amaçla olursa olsun, testlerin tamamının veya bir kısmının Merkezimizin yazılı izni olmadan kopya edilmesi, fotoğrafının çekilmesi, herhangi bir yolla çoğaltılması, yayımlanması ya da kullanılması yasaktır. Bu yasağa uymayanlar gerekli cezai sorumluluğu ve testlerin hazırlanmasındaki mali külfeti peşinen kabullenmiş sayılır. M Y S Ö 2017-YDS Spring/English This test consists of 80 questions. 1-6: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the space. 4. IQ tests are often faulted for ignoring cultural or M social biases, particularly with regard to schoolchildren, and critics claim they cannot ---- predict a person’s future performance. 1. The ageing of population, also known as 'demographic ageing', is a term used to describe ---- in the age distribution of a population from the A)initially B)accurately C)conventionally young towards people of older ages. D)narrowly E)strictly A)opportunities B)regulations C)shifts D)assumptions E)conflicts Y 5. Parents who are responsive, non-authoritarian, and who manifest empathetic and caring behaviours can ---- the development of empathy in their children. 2. Large collections Sof books are often unusable without careful attention to classification, so A)delay B)acknowledge C)relieve providing easy access to library materials using such labels as author, title, and subject, is essential D)enhance E)surpass for proper ---- of any library. A)violation B)justification C)abandonment D)utilisation E)elimination Ö 6. World War II is an important turning point in that it ---- the beginning of the end of colonial empires. A)made out B)handed down C)brought about 3. During the investigation of a lethal or an easily D)took over E)put back transmitted disease, the necessary precautions must be taken to protect health staff, because they are ---- to catching the disease in question. A)committed B)adaptable C)entitled D)vulnerable E)accessible 1 2017-YDS Spring/English 7-16: For these questions, choose the best word(s) or expression(s) to fill the space(s). 9. In the age of steam, with new railroads ---- across Europe and the US, engineers began ---- even more applications for the steam engine. 7. New research ---- that mother monkeys ---- to other females to help share the burden of raising A) to spread / finding increasingly dependent offspring. M B) having spread / to have found A) had suggested / were turning C)spreading / to find B) suggests / had turned D)to have spread / find C)suggested / have turned E) spread / having found D)has suggested / turn E) will suggest / are turning Y 10. More than 80 percent of the dry land will be affected if temperatures continue to increase ---- the present rate, but ---- very different extents. A)on / for B)at / to C)by / with 8. Patients with implants or electronic devices put S inside their bodies ---- using magnetic resonance D)in / about E)from / over imaging (MRI) because the machine’s magnet ---- these objects within the body, causing damage. A) should not be examined / must move B) could not be examined / had to move ÖC)may not be examined / used to move 11. Starting ---- 800 AD, many agricultural communities emerged ---- the Mississippi and in other fertile river D)cannot be examined / could move valleys in North America. E) must not be examined / ought to move A)for / by B)over / about C)on / with D)at / in E)around / along 2 2017-YDS Spring/English 12. 70 percent of the Earth's surface is liquid, ---- water 15. Wheat, which has been a staple food for centuries, scarcity affects more than a billion people each year. can turn out to be bad for some people ---- because they are allergic to it ---- because they have an autoimmune disorder. A)as if B)yet C)given that D)instead E)thus MA)so / that B)neither / nor C)as / as D)the more / the more E)either / or 13. Alphabetic writing systems are easy to learn and maximally efficient for transcribing any human language, ---- they are considered one ofY the major 16. ---- its similarities with other Italian cities, it is achievements of civilisation. important to emphasise that Venice's aquatic environment and associations with foreign lands A)otherwise B)but C)so via the sea endowed it with a uniqueness. D)whether E)as A)Due to B)By means of C)In terms of D)In case of E)Despite S 14. ---- historians cannot agree on when gold was first discovered, there is some evidence to suggest that the Egyptians were the first to mine it. Ö A)Now that B)Just as C)Even though D)As long as E)In case 3 2017-YDS Spring/English 17-21: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage. 19. A) had better stand The Atacama Desert in South America is peppered with odd, cushion-like plants known as the llareta, a spongy B) may have stood cousin of parsley. Despite the harsh weather conditions M that they have to (17)----, some of these plants are up to C)can stand 3,000 years old. Though looking like a rock covered by small green plants without flowers, the plant has a D)used to stand tightly packed structure of branches, each adorned (18)----clusters of tiny leaves. The resulting plant is so E) must stand strong that you (19)----on top of it very comfortably. (20)----, this hardiness comes at a price: the plants are thought to grow just 1.5 cm a year. According to Catherine Kleier, a researcher from Regis University, Colorado, the llareta became very strong (21)----a combination of environmental factors (cold at night and hot in the day) and it is compact to trap heaYt. The more compact the plant, the more successfully it protects itself. 20. A)For instance B)However C)Therefore D)Similarly E)Otherwise S 17. A)endure B)influence C)avoid D)trigger E)improve 21. Ö A)rather than B)in addition to C)contrary to D)except for E)because of 18. A) on B) at C)with D)for E) over 4 2017-YDS Spring/English 22-26: For these questions, choose the best word or expression to fill the spaces in the passage. 24. A) from B) by C)toward D)on E) into Both Mars and Venus have been objects of scientific and popular speculation since at least the beginning of the 20th century, and since the 1960s spacefaring M nations have been sending robotic probes to explore these two planets. (22)----, Mars has drawn far more attention. Since 2002 no fewer than two Mars probes have been actively gathering data during any given year. There were actually seven used in 2015 alone. This is (23)----because Mars is far more hospitable than 25. Venus, where surface temperatures can reach 480 °C, surface pressure is 92 times that of the Earth and the planet is permanently surrounded by thick clouds of A) may exist sulfuric acid. We have direct evidence that water once flowed and pooled (24)----Mars. So, it can be assumed B) must have existed that life once existed there and(25)---- at preYsent. Venus is far more Earth-like than Mars in its size, composition C)could have existed and surface gravity, but (26)---- its harsh environment, it could never host life. D)would have existed E) used to exist S 22. A)Accordingly B)Nevertheless 26. C)Furthermore D)That is A)due to B)instead of Ö E)At first C)in comparison to D)unlike E)such as 23. A)coincidental B)irreversible C)unintentional D)preventable E)plausible 5 2017-YDS Spring/English 27-36: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the given sentence. 29. Even though William Hamilton was not the first person to come up with the idea for a jet boat, ----. 27. Although buying energy-saving light bulbs and A) Greek scholar Archimedes had the concept of a jet riding your bike to work are the correct choices to boat when he devised his water screw save the planet, ----. M B) the maneuverability of the jet boat has long made its design highly marketable A) we cannot imagine these are going to eradicate the problem C)he has been credited with revolutionising the conventional world of boating B) we could save the world by relying on renewable energy sources D)Italian inventor Secondo Campani had devised a remarkably similar jet-powered boat C)that is what we should already be doing to take action E) he lived in New Zealand, where his boat was able to D)small acts of consumption can be politically activating power quickly through shallow waters Y E) it seems that people are in search for a complete solution 30. Although our bones stop growing in length in our late teens, ----. 28. Since we now genSerate more data every year than A) there is some evidence that too little or too much the entire planet did up until 2003, ----. protein can reduce bone strength A) libraries continue to keep records of knowledge in the B) it is crucial that we get necessary nutrients to keep form of books them strong and healthy right through adulthood B) it is inconceivable to have effective database C)from the first few weeks after pregnancy, our bones management systems grow and develop healthy and strong bone tissues Ö C)the way we store and preserve that data has to D)sources of dairy and non-dairy calcium can help fight change even hereditary bone conditions D)it is not possible for data stored on digital platforms to E) low bone density disease is largely preventable at any vanish age with the right diet and lifestyle E) humanity's cumulative knowledge will not disappear if stored digitally 6 2017-YDS Spring/English 31. Just as an accomplished writer must help us 33. In 19th-century Europe, women and children were visualise events rather than plainly tell them, ----. used extensively in factories ----. A) storytellers are a significant voice of culture, and their A) although only about 20 percent of workers were storytelling takes many forms employed in factories in 1850 M B) a good storyteller is expected to provide not just a B) when they became aware of the effects of factory work description but an experience on their health C)some people make a living as professional storytellers C)since they worked for lower wages and compensated for reluctant male labour D)the intellectual and emotional impacts of effective storytellers are undeniable D)as the factory worker was not characteristic of European labour in the 19th century E) the words of storytellers may capture the minds and feelings of listeners E) while domestic industry and agriculture engaged most of the population Y 32. The huge improvement in levels of readership in the 1960s largely coincided with the arrival of 34. A recent study shows that workers tend to be more television, ----. committed to their institution ----. S A) but there was a dramatic increase in the number of A) when the managers express their gratitude and make people who spent their time watching TV them feel appreciated B) thus people began to pay more attention to the B) even though payments are increased to resolve hot best-selling books, especially detective novels conflicts C)because the production of cheaper pocket editions C)until they are provided with little practical direction within reach of a wider range of the population by their bosses fostered reading Ö D)even if they engage in new, interesting activities D)so the habit of book reading came to occupy together with their colleagues proportionately less of people's leisure time E) while supporting each other's attempts to improve E) while the readership of humour, biography, and history relationships is crucial was decreasing among the younger generation 7 2017-YDS Spring/English 37-42: For these questions, choose the most accurate Turkish translation of the sentences in 35. It is more energy efficient for small birds to move by English, and the most accurate English translation hopping ----. of the sentences in Turkish. A) but they cover much more distance in a single hop 37. The arrival of the domestic horse in West Africa than with a step with their short legs transformed warfare there and turned the area into a Mset of kingdoms dependent on the force of cavalry. B) since birds spending most of their time in trees jump from branch to branch A) Batı Afrika’nın atlı asker gücüne bağlı bir dizi krallığa C)so there is an extra load on the joints of heavier birds dönüşmesinin nedeni, evcil atların bölgeye gelişi ve leaving one leg on the ground all the time oradaki savaş anlayışını değiştirmesidir. D)as almost all birds are capable of both hopping and B) Batı Afrika’daki savaş anlayışı evcil atların gelişiyle walking at the same time değişti ve bölge atlı asker gücüne dayalı bir dizi krallığa dönüştü. E) because of the fact that their light bodies easily bounce into the air C)Evcil atların Batı Afrika’ya ulaşması oradaki savaş Yanlayışını değiştirdi ve bölgeyi atlı asker gücüne dayalı bir dizi krallığa dönüştürdü. D)Evcil atların bölgeye ulaşmasıyla savaş anlayışında değişiklikler yaşayan Batı Afrika, atlı asker gücüne dayalı bir dizi krallık hâline geldi. 36. Many of us tend to overlook our mental well-being E) Evcil atların Batı Afrika'ya ulaşması oradaki savaş ----. anlayışını değiştirerek bölgenin atlı asker gücüne dayalı bir dizi krallığa dönüşmesine neden oldu. S A) so that mental health disorders can be correctly diagnosed through specialised tests B) until a serious problem arises and we lose balance in our lives C)because we should try to maintain good mental and physical health ÖD)now that we may have mental health problems when we experience too much stress E) although there are many complex reasons why we develop mental health problems 8 2017-YDS Spring/English 38. A study carried out at Weill Cornell Medical 39. Widely regarded as Australia’s capital of culture, College has found out how the brain switches Melbourne is a vibrant city with various surprises between waking and the unconscious, which around every corner. is promising for rousing people from an unconscious state. A) Çoğunlukla Avustralya’nın kültür başkenti olarak kabul Medilen Melbourne, her köşesinde çeşitli sürprizler A) Weill Cornell Tıp Fakültesi'nde yapılan ve beynin barındıran canlı bir kenttir. uyanma ve bilinçaltı arasında nasıl geçiş yaptığını B) Melbourne’ün çoğunlukla Avustralya’nın kültür ortaya çıkaran çalışma, insanları bilinçsiz bir başkenti olarak kabul edilmesinin sebebi, bu canlı durumdan uyandırma konusunda ümit vericidir. şehrin her köşesinde çeşitli sürprizler barındırıyor olmasıdır. B) Weill Cornell Tıp Fakültesi'nde yapılan bir çalışma, beynin uyanma ve bilinçaltı arasında nasıl geçiş C)Çoğunlukla Avustralya'nın kültür başkenti olarak kabul yaptığını ortaya çıkardığı için insanları bilinçsiz bir edilen Melbourne, canlı olduğu kadar her köşesinde durumdan uyandırma konusunda ümit vadediyor. çeşitli sürprizler de barındıran bir kenttir. C)Weill Cornell Tıp Fakültesi'nde, beynin uyanma ve D)Her köşesinde farklı sürprizler barındıran ve canlı bilinçaltı arasında nasıl geçiş yaptığını oYrtaya çıkarma bir kent olan Melbourne, çoğunlukla Avustralya'nın ve insanları bilinçsiz bir durumdan uyandırma kültür başkenti olarak kabul edilir. konusunda ümit vadeden bir çalışma yapılmıştır. E) Melbourne çoğunlukla Avustralya’nın kültür başkenti D)Beynin uyanma ve bilinçaltı arasında nasıl geçiş olarak kabul edilir, çünkü bu canlı şehir her köşesinde yaptığını ortaya çıkaran ve insanları bilinçsiz bir çeşitli sürprizler barındırır. durumdan uyandırma konusunda ümit vadeden bir çalışma, Weill Cornell Tıp Fakültesi'nde yapılmıştır. E) Weill Cornell Tıp Fakültesi'nde yapılan bir çalışma, S beynin uyanma ve bilinçaltı arasında nasıl geçiş yaptığını ortaya çıkarmıştır, ki bu insanları bilinçsiz bir durumdan uyandırma konusunda ümit vericidir. Ö 9 2017-YDS Spring/English 40. Öğretmenler, öğretim yöntemi seçerken, 41. Köpek balıklarının sayısı önemli ölçüde azalıyor ve öğrencilerinin özellikleri ve hâlihazırdaki kaynakların bu yırtıcı balıklar yavaş geliştikleri ve nadiren yanı sıra kendi yeterliliklerini ve bilgilerini de göz üredikleri için nüfuslarının hızlı bir şekilde artması önünde bulundurmalıdırlar. olası görünmüyor. A) What teachers need to do when choosing a teaching MA) Given that the number of sharks is falling drastically as method is to take their own capabilities and knowledge these predatory fish slowly mature and seldom into account as well as their students' characteristics reproduce, there is no likelihood that their population and the resources available. will increase quickly. B) When they follow a teaching method, teachers are B) Because sharks slowly mature and rarely breed, their expected to consider their own capabilities and number is falling greatly, and therefore the population knowledge together with their students' characteristics of these predatory fish seems unlikely to increase and the resources available. rapidly. C)When choosing a teaching method, teachers should C)The number of sharks is falling dramatically, and since take their own capabilities and knowledge into account these predatory fish slowly mature and rarely along with their students' characteristics Yand the reproduce, it seems unlikely that their population resources available. will increase quickly. D)When implementing a teaching method, teachers D)It seems unlikely that shark population will increase should consider not only their students' characteristics quickly since these predatory fish, whose number and the resources available but also their own is falling considerably, slowly mature and seldom capabilities and knowledge. breed. E) Their own capabilities and knowledge besides their E) The number of sharks is falling substantially, and students' characteristics and the resources available because these predatory fish slowly mature and rarely S should be taken into account by teachers when reproduce, it is not probable that there will be a choosing a teaching method. significant increase in their population. Ö 10 2017-YDS Spring/English 42. Dünya üzerinde yaşam başladığından bu yana yüz milyonlarca bitki ve hayvan türünün nesli tükendi ve insanlar son 300 yıldır doğal yaşam alanlarını tahrip ederek yok olma sürecini büyük ölçüde hızlandırdı. A) Since life began on Earth, hundreds of millions of M species of plants and animals have been threatened with extinction, and over the past 300 years the extinction process has substantially accelerated due to habitat destruction caused by people. B) Hundreds of millions of species of plants and animals have become extinct since life began on Earth, and over the past 300 years people have been damaging habitats, thus significantly speeding up the extinction process. Y C)Hundreds of millions of species of plants and animals have become extinct since life began on Earth, and over the past 300 years people have dramatically speeded up the extinction process by destroying habitats. D)Since life began on Earth, hundreds of millions of species of plants and animals have become extinct, and habitats have been damaged by people, which has substantiallyS accelerated the extinction process for the past 300 years. E) There are hundreds of millions of species of plants and animals that have faced extinction since life began on Earth, and people who are destroying habitats have dramatically speeded up the extinction process for the past 300 years. Ö 11 2017-YDS Spring/English 43-46: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 44. It is pointed out in the passage that in the 1950s, car manufacturers ----. One day in 1952, John W. Hetrick was driving with his A) developed a compressed mechanism which inflated wife and daughter in the front seat when he had to airbags swiftly change his direction suddenly and brake quickly to M avoid an obstacle. Instinctively, he and his wife put their B) benefitted from optional airbags to raise the safety arms out to protect their daughter in case of a crash. awareness among the customers This event inspired him to provide automobiles with airbags to protect people during accidents. Hetrick had C)paid more attention to the physical appearance of cars been an engineer in the US Navy during World War II. rather than their safety He recalled a compressed-air torpedo accidentally turning itself on, causing its canvas cover to shoot up D)started to produce standard airbags in line with the into the air, 'quicker than a blink of an eye'. In 1952, innovations in airbag technology Hetrick proposed using compressed air to inflate airbags rapidly during car crashes. He received a patent for this E) were highly concerned with safety requirements invention in 1953, but car manufacturers in the 1950s imposed on automobile industry were more interested in style than safety. LYater, consumers became more safety conscious and airbag technology improved. The first airbags were optional, but by the 1990s, they had become standard. Although airbags have saved thousands of lives, they are not always sufficient to prevent death and injury during crashes. Travellers must also wear seat belts, and 45. Which of the following can be inferred from the automobiles must have dashboards made of soft materials and steering columns that can absorb energy passage? during impact from car crashes. S A) The injuries and deaths in car accidents can be completely prevented with airbags. B) As soon as Hetrick patented the airbag, it became obligatory for manufacturers to equip cars with airbags. C)The dashboards and steering columns of automobiles 43. It can be understood from the passage that the should be designed elaborately to increase the Ö airbags were ----. efficiency of airbags. D)Travellers are expected to fasten their seat belts which A) widely accepted when they were first introduced in enable the airbags to inflate more quickly. 1952 E) Automobile designs are required to manipulate the B) invented with the fundamental aim of making cars look energy in a crash in order to save people’s lives. more attractive C)manufactured largely in order to improve automobile marketing and increase the sales D)invented by a US engineer while he was launching the canvas cover into the air E) designed to work very fast to provide immediate protection for people 12 2017-YDS Spring/English 46. Which could be the best title for the passage? A) Advances in the Automobile Industry B) An Alternative Way to Save Life M C)Airbags as a Safety Regulation D)How to Prevent Car Accidents with Airbags E) The Advance of Airbag Technology Y S Ö 13 2017-YDS Spring/English 47-50: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 48. Which of the following makes chimpanzees resemble us? An application to translate chimp language may be A) Their language learning ability to get involved in a available in the near future! Chimpanzees can learn foreign environment to pronounce 'apple' in two chimp languages – a finding M that calls into question how unique our own language B) The fixed words that they use to refer to objects ability is. Katie Slocombe of the University of York, UK, and her team recorded vocalisations by a group of adult C)The association between their words and emotional chimps from the Netherlands before and after their outbursts relocation to Edinburgh Zoo. Three years after the move, the Dutch chimps has picked up the D)Their capability to decrease the peak frequencies of pronunciation of their Scottish hosts. The peak their loud calls frequencies of the Dutch chimps' loud calls fell from 932 to 708 hertz to match closely with the low-toned E) The three-year period in which they can learn a foreign pronunciations of the Scottish apes. The change was language gradual and coincided with the growing friendship of the two groups. This means that, like us, chimpYs can learn foreign language to fit in with new neighbours. The finding also challenges the prevailing theory that chimp words for objects are fixed because they result from excited, involuntary outbursts. The general assumption was that animals do not have control over the sounds they make, whereas we learn the labels for things 49. What does the passage mainly focus on? socially, which is what separates us from animals, states Slocombe. But this may be wrong, it seems. "It is A) The differences between the Dutch and Scottish apes the first time call structure has been dissociated from Sin Edinburgh Zoo emotional outbursts," she says. B) Why it took three years for the Dutch chimps to establish friendship with the Scottish apes C)How chimps differ from humans in their language ability D)How chimps can learn to pronounce words through socialising Ö 47. It is pointed out in the passage that after being relocated, the Dutch chimps ----. E) The importance of emotional outbursts for chimps A) changed the pronunciation patterns of their Scottish hosts B) had increasing frequencies of loud calls C)had a low-toned pronunciation as they did in the Netherlands D)began to make sounds in a way similar to that of the Scottish apes E) experienced a sudden change in how they pronounced words 14 2017-YDS Spring/English 50. One can understand from the passage that unlike what is commonly accepted, ----. A) chimp words for objects do not vary B) chimps can consciously change the sounds they M produce C)chimp call structure includes involuntary outbursts D)chimps are not able to produce sounds that have meanings E) chimp words for objects are linked to emotional outbursts Y S Ö 15 2017-YDS Spring/English 51-54: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 52. What is the main reason why Manby's invention in 1818 was more efficient? George Manby is most famous for his invention of the A) It could use various pressurising agents to scatter the Manby Mortar – a device once used to rescue a lot of extinguishing liquid. people from shipwrecks. He is also known as the father M of the modern fire extinguisher, which in itself has also B) It enabled firemen to deal with fires in places that they saved thousands of lives. Fire extinguishers actually had previously been unable to reach. predate Manby's invention. One of the earliest ones was designed in 1723 by Ambrose Godfrey. Godfrey's device C)It proved its convenience when it helped to extinguish consisted of a fire-extinguishing liquid and a chamber of a fire in London in 1729. gunpowder. When the attached fuses were lit, the gunpowder exploded and scattered the liquid. They D)It contained potassium carbonate which could spread were not widely used, although there is an account of over a large area. them being used in a fire in London in 1729. Manby's 1818 invention was more efficient. He was inspired to E) It could save more lives than Godfrey's invention could invent a portable fire extinguisher after witnessing do. firemen's inability to fight fires on the top floYors of buildings because they were difficult to get to. He designed a device containing potassium carbonate with the remaining space taken up by compressed air. When the device was activated, it allowed the air to rush out and spread the potassium carbonate over quite a range. The system could also be used with water, and was 53. One can understand from the passage that Manby's portable, allowing firemen to reach otherwise inaccessible areas. Manby's invention was soon fire extinguisher ----. replaced by a newer model. However, the use of S compressed air formed the premise for new prototypes, A) was designed with the help of the firemen who wanted with modern extinguishers using carbon dioxide as the to reach inaccessible areas pressurising agent in a similar way. B) was not used as widely as Godfrey's device when it was first introduced C)was very similar to his another invention called the Manby Mortar Ö D)was appropriate for the use of several pressurising agents to spread the potassium carbonate 51. It is clear from the passage that Manby ----. E) took more time to activate when compared to Godfrey's device A) was inspired by different types of fire extinguishers while producing his own type B) became famous when he himself rescued a lot of people from a shipwreck C)is regarded as the creator of the fire extinguisher although similar types existed before D)was the first person to use a fire extinguisher in a fire in London in 1729 E) collaborated with Godfrey to invent the fire extinguisher 16 2017-YDS Spring/English 54. What is the primary purpose of the author? A) To give examples of the pressurising agents used in fire extinguishers B) To make a comparison between Manby's fire M extinguisher and Godfrey's device C)To inform the reader about the development of the fire extinguisher D)To put emphasis on portable fire extinguishers that help firemen to reach inaccessible areas E) To describe the benefits and limitations of Manby's fire extinguisher Y S Ö 17 2017-YDS Spring/English 55-58: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 56. A control group is a group in an experiment where the factor being tested is not applied so that it can be compared against another group where the factor is applied. It might sound like something from a modern-day vampire movie, but transfer of youthful blood can have a reviving effect on the mind, researchers have found. Or According to this definition, which of the following M at least, it can in mice: a study by Stanford University is referred to with the expression 'the control School of Medicine has discovered that something in group' that is underlined in the passage? the blood of young mice has the ability to restore mental capabilities in older mice. Over the course of three A) The old mice injected with the blood of young mice weeks, the scientists gave 18-month-old mice eight infusions of plasma taken from animals that were just B) The old mice injected with the blood of other old mice three months old, and then put them through a set of experiments to test their spatial memory – memory C)The old mice with more sophisticated hippocampi relating to the position of things and how large or small they are. The mice were seen to perform consistently better in the tests after receiving the young blood. Old D)The young mice with less sophisticated hippocampi mice injected with the blood of other old micYe, on the other hand, showed no improvement in the tests. The E) The young mice injected with the blood of old mice team found that new connections were also formed in the old mice's hippocampi, which again were not seen inthe control group. The hippocampus is a brain region that plays a huge role in memory, particularly in recognising and recalling spatial patterns. It is very sensitive to ageing, showing a natural decline in function as people grow older. In conditions such as Alzheimer's disease, this deterioration is accelerated, leading to an S inability to form new memories. It is as yet unclear whether transferring young blood into older individuals would have the same effect in humans. 57. It is understood from the passage that the hippocampus ----. A) weakens more quickly in mice than in humans Ö B) will perform much better in old people if they receive 55. It is clearly stated in the passage that transfer of blood from young ones blood from young mice into old mice ----. C)provides help in remembering the place and size of things A) has helped old mice boost their performance in spatial-memory tests D)gets better at remembering as one gets older and his or her spatial awareness develops B) was performed with the blood especially obtained from 18-month-old mice E) stops functioning when someone develops such conditions as Alzheimer's disease C)has hardly made a difference in old mice in making connections in their hippocampi D)improves their memories and it is evidently going to have the same effect on humans E) is one of many similar studies carried out by the Stanford University School of Medicine 18 2017-YDS Spring/English 58. Which could be the best title for this passage? A) How to Take Care of Your Hippocampus B) The Important Role of the Hippocampus M C)How Mice's Spatial Memory Functions D)Looking to Mice for Better Memories E) Saying Goodbye to Mental Disorders Y S Ö 19 2017-YDS Spring/English 59-62: Answer these questions according to the passage below. 60. Which of the following was declared by the US National Geographic Society in 1989? For many years praise was awarded to the US explorer A) Dr Cook's expedition was proven to have taken place Robert Peary, who claimed to have reached the North a year before Peary's journey. Pole on 6 April 1909. Yet even at the time his claim was M disputed. Dr Frederick Cook, a rival American explorer, B) Peary’s photographs and records were as insisted he had reached the pole almost a year earlier. controversial and unconvincing as those of Dr Cook. But neither of them could provide definitive proof of their supposed triumph. Cook's own evidence was rejected C)Dr Cook’s claim was suspicious since he did not by an independent commission, while Peary refused to reveal clear evidence relating to his travel to the North hand over any details at all. In 1989, the US National Pole. Geographic Society announced that an analysis of photographs taken by Peary, together with his records D)The North Pole was discovered several times by of ocean depths and other data, were consistent with his airborne and submarine expeditions before Peary’s expedition getting within eight kilometres of the true and Dr Cook's expeditions. pole. Cook's claim, meanwhile, has always been followed by suspicions of fraud. In the yearsY that E) The information collected by Peary could describe the followed, the North Pole was reached many times by real characteristics of the North Pole. airborne and submarine expeditions. Surprisingly, the first undisputed expedition to reach the North Pole over the surface did not achieve its goal until 1968, when the American Ralph Plaisted and three companions arrived on snowmobiles. On 6 April the following year, the British explorer Wally Herbert became the first to reach the North Pole the traditional way, on foot. S 61. Why did the arrival of Ralph Plaisted and his companions at the North Pole in 1968 cause surprise? 59. It is stated in the passage that Robert Peary ----. Ö A) They succeeded in arriving at the North Pole using A) was worried that people would learn he was not the snowmobiles. the first explorer to reach the North Pole B) No one was expecting that a group of people could B) had been accepted for years as the first person to walk as far as the North Pole. reach the North Pole although he did not offer conclusive evidence about his expedition C)At that time, their expedition was the only one that was recognised to be true. C)did not want to present the details of his expedition to the independent commission after he learned that Dr D)Herbert was claimed to have arrived at the North Pole Cook was rejected before them on foot. D)requested the US National Geographic Society to E) They provided more accurate data than earlier analyse the photographs and data he gathered during airborne and submarine expeditions did. his expedition to prove his claim E) was not viewed as the first person to reach the North Pole since Dr Cook was thought to have arrived there earlier 20 2017-YDS Spring/English 62. Which of the following can be concluded from the passage? A) All of the expeditions to the North Pole were questioned until Herbert reached the pole on foot. M B) Even though Peary has been accepted as the first explorer to reach the North Pole, it was actually Dr Cook who attained the goal. C)The adventurers were strongly supported by the US National Geographic Society during their trip to the North Pole. D)Reaching the North Pole has been an objective to be achieved for adventurers, which brings reputation to them. Y E) April is the best time for embarking on an expedition to the North Pole, as both Peary and Herbert did. S Ö 21 2017-YDS Spring/English 63-67: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the dialogue. 64. Reporter:  Antibiotic resistance is on the rise, and we are potentially facing a time when standard antibiotics simply won't work anymore. Why is antibiotic 63. Christopher: resistance becoming more widespread?  I like the idea of Formula E, which is a new racing championship for single-seater cars powered only M Chemist: by electricity.  One reason could be that a type of bacteria has developed molecular mechanisms that actually Albert: make an antibiotic drug ineffective.  ---- Reporter: Christopher:  Why is the increase in bacterial resistance  Well, it is a platform for research to improve considered a threatening issue? electric powerstations and charging systems to make electric cars more feasible and hopefully Chemist: more popular.  ---- Y Albert: Reporter:  I see, this seems to be a good way to encourage  This sounds horrible! the use of energy-efficient and sustainable transportation. A) The misuse of antibiotics has certainly contributed to the resistance phenomena. A lot of antibiotics are A) Why do we need this when there are other races such used in farming, which is practised without complete as Formula 1? control. B) What kind of powSer do Formula E race cars use? B) We should prevent them from producing toxins that lead to illness rather than kill them. That kind of C)How do they plan to attract sponsors for such an intervention can reduce the chances that the bacteria event? will develop resistance. D)Where do they plan to have these races? C)Whenever any pressure is put on bacteria, it will resist. If such pressure is not created, there will be no E) How frequently will the Formula E races be held? evolutionary pressure for the bacteria to develop resistance. Ö D)If new drugs are not developed against these resistant bacteria, by the year 2050, death from antimicrobial resistant bacteria could actually even surpass death from cancer. E) I'm encouraged by the fact that there are more than 200 different bacteria species that live in our guts, and the majority of them are actually beneficial to us. 22 2017-YDS Spring/English 65. Daisy: 66. Defne:  I want to take up gardening as a hobby and grow  I read that remembering the past in a positive way vegetables, but I don't have a garden to plant them could make us happy in times of crisis. in. Beren: Caroline:  ---- M  ---- Defne: Daisy:  Can you give me an example?  But they may not grow successfully if they don't get a sufficient amount of sunlight. Beren:  During a divorce, I'm not sure that it's helpful for a Caroline: person to focus on all the good times in the  You can grow some vegetables without any sun at marriage. They're likely to experience an even all. For example, lettuce and parsley will grow greater sense of loss. beautifully under artificial light. A) Actually, when I'm in a bad mood, I find it more Y A) It's not only the space you should take into account, beneficial to think about a prosperous future rather but sunlight is also important when growing than the better past. vegetables. B) Most people believe that looking at old photos B) Vegetables need to be watered very frequently, and showing the good times in the past has a positive they tend to grow more nicely in sunny areas. influence on mood. C)I don't agree. Recalling better times when a person is C)Have you ever heard about indoor gardening? You depressed will worsen their problems rather than solve can use your attic, basement, or balcony to grow them. vegetables. S D)Near a bright window that takes sunlight at high D)I don't think so. Instead of being nostalgic to feel intensity, you can grow cherry tomatoes and happy, I generally try to find possible ways to cucumbers. overcome my crisis. E) In such situations, seeking professional help or E) I suggest you install a greenhouse. Greenhouses receiving support from close friends may bring a deep are the most convenient places to grow vegetables, relief. and they vary vastly in size and price. Ö 23 2017-YDS Spring/English 68-71: For these questions, choose the best 67. Edward: rephrased form of the given sentence.  What do you think the difference between the words 'inequality' and 'disparity' is? 68. Exercise both strengthens our muscles and William: encourages the production of special chemicals  Well, both have negative connotations. And they Mcalled endorphins, which make us feel good and act both imply a lack of something. I guess they to reduce pain. are basically synonyms. Edward: A) In addition to having stronger muscles through  ---- exercising, we are in a better mood and feel less pain thanks to special chemicals, endorphins, that it William: activates.  Oh, I see. So, if I say that there is a disparity between you and me, it might not be a bad thing, B) In order for our body to generate more endorphins but inequality would be negative. – the special chemicals that make us happier and reduce pain – and to strengthen our muscles, we Yshould exercise. A) That's sort of correct, but we use 'disparity' when we talk about scientific topics and 'inequality' for social C)Making our muscles stronger with exercise produces issues. special chemicals, such as endorphins, in the body and makes us feel good by relieving pain. B) That's basically correct, though 'disparity' tells us that something is unfair, while 'inequality' means some D)The production of important chemicals like endorphins groups have more advantages than others. not only strengthens our muscles but also encourages us to do exercise to feel better and feel less pain. C)They're more or less the same, but in academic circles, the term S'disparity' is an out-of-date E) Endorphins, special chemicals which are produced expression; the current term is 'inequality'. while exercising, strengthen our muscles as well as making us happier by reducing pain. D)They're essentially synonymous, but we can use 'inequality' to express minor differences and 'disparity' for significant levels of difference. E) You're right, they're very similar, but 'disparity' can be used to talk about differences neutrally, while 'inequality' suggests a value judgement. Ö 24 2017-YDS Spring/English 69. Chameleons cannot generate their own body heat 70. Rome expanded from a small Italian city-state to a so when they want to warm themselves, their colour world power not just by conquering other societies will darken to absorb more heat from the sun. but also by assimilating them. A) Once their colours darken, chameleons can get more A) Rome, which was initially a small Italian city-state, heat from the sun, but to warm themselves much Mevolved into a world power by both assimilating and better, they have to produce their own body heat. conquering other societies. B) When chameleons transform themselves into a dark B) Rome could not have developed into a world power colour, they take in more heat from the sun and warm from a small Italian city-state if it had not been able to themselves easily, which helps them control their own conquer other societies and assimilate them. body heat. C)What led Rome to emerge as a world power was the C)Chameleons can warm themselves with the heat from assimilation of various societies it conquered, the sun thanks to the dark colours they change into, otherwise it would have remained as a small Italian and that is why they do not need to generate their own city-state. body heat. D)The reason why Rome turned into a world power from Y D)Because chameleons are not capable of providing a small Italian city-state is that it placed a higher their own body heat, their colour gets darker so that priority on the assimilation of other societies than more heat is received from the sun, and they can on their conquest. warm themselves. E) Rome, which was a small Italian city-state at the very E) Chameleons’ body heat is linked to dark colours beginning, conquered and assimilated other societies because when they are darker, more heat from the that had been struggling to become a world power. sun can be absorbed, otherwise they cannot warm themselves. S Ö 25 2017-YDS Spring/English 72-75: For these questions, choose the best option to complete the missing part of the 71. English is a mother tongue for many people in the passage. world, who are increasingly outnumbered by those who learn English as a foreign language. 72. Almost all of us experience prejudice in one form or A) English, either the mother tongue or foreign language another. People make assumptions about us on the of many people, is being spoken in almost every part Mbasis of our age, ethnicity, race or sex, and we often of the world. find ourselves automatically making the same sorts of assumptions about others. Herein lies a paradox: B) Although English is being learnt as a foreign language prejudice is socially undesirable; however, it is more widely than ever, there are also a large amount widespread in society. ---- For example, the system of people whose first language is English. of apartheid in South Africa, where black people C)Lots of people around the world are native speakers of were forced to live away from white people, was a English; however, the number of learners of English as classic case of such prejudice, as it was defended a foreign language has far surpassed the number of publicly as being recognition of and respect for its native speakers. cultural differences. D)Throughout the world, there is a significant gap Y A) No matter what the majority thinks, the government between people who speak English as their first has to make sure that all citizens are safe regardless language and those who learn it as a foreign of their background. language. B) If public awareness is raised, prejudice may not trigger E) In the past, the number of English native speakers serious problems in multicultural societies. was greater than those who had been learning English as a foreign language, but now it is not the case. C)Once the influence of certain ideologies becomes commonplace throughout the world, it is not easy to eradicate the core beliefs. S D)Even in societies where prejudice is institutionalised, sophisticated justifications are often used to excuse or deny its presence. E) Only when the necessary precautions are taken, can people feel secure, respected and equal in society. Ö 26 2017-YDS Spring/English 73. When someone we regard as a cherished friend 74. The origins of the 35 mm camera lie in the suddenly is not there for us, it can feel like a hurtful increasing availability of motion picture film stock betrayal. But before accusing or condemning them, during the early years of the 20th century. The 35 mm you might want to ask yourself such questions as format was first used in Edison’s Kinetoscope, a "Have they disappointed me before?", "Are my moving picture viewing device patented in 1891, and expectations too high?", "Have I always behaved was later adopted as the standard film gauge by M perfectly towards them?". ---- Since we are all cinema-makers after 1896. ---- However, as the fallible and could potentially disappoint our friends, quality of the film improved, the potential virtues of it is good to remember that there are two sides to small size and convenience of handling began to every story. appeal to still camera designers. A) Exploring these issues honestly will allow you to A) Three Spanish inventors took out a British patent for a accept your share of responsibility. still camera using 35 mm format as early as 1908. B) It is common in these situations to start wondering if B) Unsurprisingly perhaps, the 35 mm camera gained the person was ever a 'real' friend. enormous popularity across the world. Y C)Particularly with social media, many bestow the status C)Sales of the cameras were limited by the outbreak of of friend on others with surprising speed and ease. World War I in 1914. D)An enduring friendship is based on a similar life D)The earliest 35 mm film was very slow and not ideal experience, and a shared value system. for still camera work. E) One reason for ending the friendship or distancing E) The first 35 mm camera sold to the public was yourself from it is growing apart in terms of interests. probably an American model developed in 1913. S Ö 27 2017-YDS Spring/English 76-80: For these questions, choose the irrelevant 75. Children who do not master basic reading skills at sentence in the passage. an early age, specifically the ability to automatically decode new words and build vocabulary that leads to fluency, experience academic failure. ---- In other 76. (I) As evidence has mounted about the threats that the words, the curriculum focuses much less on Earth is facing, from rising temperatures and ocean teaching students to acquire the basic tools of Macidification to deforestation and extreme weather, literacy, and much more on using those tools to NASA has given priority to missions aimed at coping learn content, express ideas, and solve problems. At with the impacts. (II) NASA will be devising new this point, students are likely to be given content technology to monitor earthquake-prone regions on the textbooks in science and social studies and to read Earth via the satellites. (III) One of its newest satellites, a non-fiction for the purpose of gaining new $916 million observatory called SMAP (for Soil Moisture information. Active Passive) was launched in January 2015. (IV) It was designed to measure soil moisture both by bouncing a radar beam off the surface and by recording A) The readiness of children to read, in particular, has radiation emitted by the soil itself. (V) In July 2015, the recently gained greater attention from educators. active radar stopped transmitting, but the passive radiometer is still doing its job, and its maps will help B) Family environment is as important as the school Yscientists forecast droughts, floods, and famines. environment in children’s development. C)By the third grade, learning to read has become A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V reading to learn. D)Children with good phonological awareness skills usually learn to read quickly. E) They also need to learn book-handling skills such as orienting a bookS correctly. 77. (I) During the Renaissance, Italy was not a single, unified country. (II) It consisted of a patchwork of small states, each with its own history, government, and traditions. (III) Artistic styles varied significantly from region to region. (IV) T he writings of Vasari, a painter and architect from Florence, helped establish the idea that Renaissance art originated in Italy. (V) Although Ö Florence, Rome, and Venice were the main centres of artistic activity, skilled artists produced significant works in other areas as well. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 28 2017-YDS Spring/English 78. (I)When we listen to music, electrical waves in our 80. (I) Although iron is the most common metal, it was the brains synchronise to the tempo, but some people's last to be used by people. (II) Humanity made a huge brains are better at synchronising to the beat.(II)Keith advance when people learned how to use metals. Doelling at New York University and his team recorded (III) Metal tools were easier to shape than stone ones, brainwaves of musicians and non-musicians as they and could be mass-produced using molds. (IV) Unlike a listened to music.(III)While both groups could stone axe, which was useless when broken, a copper or synchronise their brain waves to the rhythms, Mbronze one could be melted down and recycled. non-musicians struggled to synchronise to particularly (V) Shiny metals, such as gold and silver, were also slow music.(IV)Musical training might also help people perfect materials for jewellery and coins. with dyslexia – a difficulty with reading and writing caused by the brain's inability to see the difference A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V between some letter shapes.(V)Musicians can do this, not because of their natural talent, but because they have been trained to mentally subdivide music into shorter sections. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V Y 79. (I) While urbanisation has been a notable characteristic S of European society for centuries, the trend toward industralisation and urbanisation has accelerated phenomenally since World War II. (II)London and Paris, for example, have been major urban centres for centuries, but many other European cities have experienced rapid expansion of their populations only since the late 1940s. (III) The clustering of substantial populations into metropolitan regions is a distinctive demographic feature of Europe. (IV) In countries such as ÖItaly and Spain, which were largely agricultural and rural before World War II, we find that many of their cities have now become home to large numbers of people. (V)For example, Madrid and Rome experienced remarkable increases between 1960 and 1990, in comparison with more moderate increases for most cities in the former West Germany, France, and the United Kingdom. A) I B) II C)III D)IV E) V 29 CHECK YOUR ANSWERS. M Y S Ö 2017 YABANCI DİL BİLGİSİ SEVİYE TESPİT SINAVI İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ 2017-YDS İLKBAHAR DÖNEMİ 02-04-2017 1. C 48. A 2. D 49. D 3. D 50. B 4. B 51. C M 5. D 52. B 6. C 53. D 7. D 54. C 8. D 55. A 9. C 56. B 10. B 57. C 11. E 58. D 12. B 59. B Y 13. C 60. E 14. C 61. C 15. E 62. D 16. E 63. A 17. A 64. D 18. C 65. C S 19. C 66. C 20. B 67. E 21. E 68. A 22. B 69. D 23. E 70. A 24. D 71. C Ö25. A 72. D 26. A 73. A 27. A 74. D 28. C 75. C 29. C 76. B 30. B 77. D 31. B 78. D 32. D 79. C 33. C 80. A 34. A 35. E 36. B 37. C 38. E 39. A 40. C 41. C 42. C 43. E 44. C 45. E 46. E 47. D